<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>Tor, A Street Boy of Jerusalem</title>
                <author><name reg="Kingsley, Florence Morse">Florence Morse Kingsley</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2017-04-09">April 9, 2017</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>54523</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author><name reg="Kingsley, Florence Morse">Florence Morse Kingsley</name></author>
<title>Tor, A Street Boy of Jerusalem</title>
<imprint><publisher>Henry Altemus Company</publisher>
<pubPlace>Philadelphia</pubPlace>
<date>1904</date>
</imprint>
                </bibl>            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="it" />
            <language id="fr" />
            <language id="en" />
            <language id="de" />
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2017-04-09">April 9, 2017</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>David Edwards</name>, <name>Stefan Cramme</name> and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team 
at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .center      { text-align: center }
        .ill         { margin-left: 2 }
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        figure       { text-align: center }
        head         { text-align: center }
        .w40         { }
        .w80         { }
        @media pdf   {
        .w40         { width: 40%; page-float: 'htp' }
        .w80         { width: 80%; page-float: 'htp' }
                       }                    

      </pgStyleSheet>
<pgCharMap formats="txt">
        <char id="U0x2009">
          <charName>thinsp</charName>
          <desc>THIN SPACE</desc>
          <mapping></mapping>
        </char>
      </pgCharMap>
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>
<div>
<divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>
<div>
<pb/>
<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 70%"/>

<p rend="center"><hi rend="font-size: small">THIS IS THE</hi><lb/>
AUTOGRAPHED EDITION<lb/>
<hi rend="font-size: small">LIMITED TO TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY COPIES.</hi></p>

<p rend="ill">NUMBER <hi rend='italic'>58</hi></p>

<p rend="center"><hi rend="italic">Florence Morse Kingsley</hi></p>

<milestone unit="tb" rend="rule: 70%"/>

<pgIf output='txt'><then></then>
<else><p><figure rend="w80" url="images/autograph.png"><figDesc>Autograph</figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>

<pb/>

<pb/>

<pb/><anchor id="frontispiece"/>
<pgIf output="txt">
<then><p rend="ill">[Illustration: <hi rend='italic'>Frontispiece.</hi> <q>TOR FLATTENED HIMSELF AGAINST A CONVENIENT WALL.</q> <hi rend='italic'>See p. 31.</hi>]</p></then>
<else><p><figure rend="w80" url="images/frontis.jpg"><head><hi rend='italic'>Frontispiece.<lb/><q>TOR FLATTENED HIMSELF AGAINST A CONVENIENT WALL.</q><lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>See <ref target="Pg031">p. 31</ref>.</hi></hi></head><figDesc>Frontispiece. <q>TOR FLATTENED HIMSELF AGAINST A CONVENIENT WALL.</q></figDesc></figure></p></else></pgIf>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pgIf output="html">
  <then><p rend="center"><figure url="images/cover.jpg" id="coverpage"><figDesc>Cover image</figDesc></figure></p></then>
</pgIf>
</div>
<titlePage rend="center; page-break-before: always">
<pb/>
<docTitle>
  <titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: xx-large">Tor,<lb/>A Street Boy of Jerusalem</titlePart>
</docTitle>
<lb/><lb/>
<byline><hi rend="font-size: large">By</hi><lb/>
<docAuthor rend="font-size: x-large">Florence Morse Kingsley</docAuthor><lb/>
Author of “Stephen,” “Paul,” “Kindly Light,” etc.</byline>
<lb/><lb/><lb/>
<titlePart><hi rend="font-size: small">WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY</hi><lb/>
F. A. ECKMAN</titlePart>
<lb/><lb/><lb/>
<docImprint>
<pubPlace><hi rend="smallcaps">Philadelphia</hi></pubPlace><lb/>
<publisher><hi rend='smallcaps'>Henry Altemus Company</hi></publisher>
</docImprint>

</titlePage>
<div rend="center; page-break-before: always">
<pb/>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 3"><hi rend='italic'>Copyright, 1904, by Henry Altemus</hi></p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 1">BY THE SAME AUTHOR</p>

<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paul, a Herald of the Cross</hi></p>
<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Stephen, a Soldier of the Cross</hi></p>
<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Cross Triumphant</hi></p>
<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Wings and Fetters</hi><lb/>A Story for Girls</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 1; margin-bottom: 1">One Dollar Each</p>

<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>An Unrecorded Miracle</hi></p>
<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Under the Stars</hi></p>
<p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Kindly Light</hi></p>

<p rend="margin-top: 1">Fifty Cents Each</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CONTENTS</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5cm}r'; tblcolumns: 'lw(35m) r'">
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER I.</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-size: small">PAGE</hi></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>A Stranger Comes to Town</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg013">13</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER II.</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>A Sparrow Falleth</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg024">24</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER III.</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Man Who Opened His Eyes</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg035">35</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER IV.</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><q><hi rend='smallcaps'>The King, My Master!</hi></q></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg053">53</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER V.</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Deep Calleth Unto Deep</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg064">64</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER VI.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rejected by Men</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg083">83</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER VII.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Felicia</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg099">99</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER VIII.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Chelluh Drives a Bargain</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg115">115</ref></cell>
</row>
  <pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/><row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER IX.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Before the Cock Crew</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg130">130</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER X.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>In the Palace Garden</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg146">146</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER XI.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Love Triumphant</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg160">160</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell rend="text-align: center">CHAPTER XII.</cell>
<cell></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>By Gennesaret Water</hi>,</cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg175">175</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>ILLUSTRATIONS</head>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{7cm}r'; tblcolumns: 'lw(52m) r'">
  <row>
<cell><q>Tor flattened himself against a convenient wall</q></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend='italic'><ref target="frontispiece">Frontispiece</ref></hi></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><q><q>I have said it. I will take thee to the King</q></q></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="image048">Facing p. 48</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><q><q>Take him away!</q> she commanded</q></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="image112">Facing p. 112</ref></cell>
</row>
  <row>
<cell><q>His wicked face disfigured with rage and pain</q></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="image168">Facing p. 168</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb/>

</div>

</front>
<body rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n='13'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p rend="font-size: xx-large; center">TOR, A STREET BOY OF JERUSALEM</p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="I. A Stranger Comes to Town"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="I. A Stranger Comes to Town"/>
<head>CHAPTER I<lb/>A STRANGER COMES TO TOWN</head>

<p>
Tor was hungry. Hunger was a
common experience in Tor’s short
life; he merely tightened the dingy
rags about his middle and continued to
stare at the group of sparrows quarreling
noisily in the red dust of the street.
It had occurred to Tor that the life of a
sparrow must be vastly pleasanter than
that of a boy. <q>They find plenty to
eat,</q> he told himself enviously, as he
hugged his lean little body. With a sudden
impulse the child flung a pebble into
<pb n='14'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>the midst of the belligerents. The birds
shook the dust from their ruffled feathers
with noisy clamor of dismay, darted into
the bright air, and disappeared far above
the tops of the tallest houses.
</p>

<p>
Tor laughed aloud as a second idea
struggled with the first in his clouded
brain; then he checked himself thoughtfully,
and, winding his rags more closely
about him, trotted noiselessly away down
the street.
</p>

<p>
Chelluh, the blind beggar, for more
years than one could count on the fingers
of both hands the undisputed proprietor
of a snug corner just within the Damascus
gate, was shaking his brazen cup
after his daily custom. The cup rattled
bravely, for certain coins had already
been dropped therein by the charitable.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have mercy, kind lords of Jerusalem;
have mercy on the sorrows of one born
<pb n='15'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>blind!</q> chanted the beggar in his whining
monotone. <q>Kind lords, beautiful
ladies, only a denarius, I beseech of you,
and may the blessings of heaven—</q> The
blind man paused, his quick ear catching
the sound of a hesitating footfall
amid the hurrying steps which passed
in and out at the open gate. <q>Now may
Jove, Jehovah, and all lesser gods be
gracious unto thee, noble sir,</q> he
began.
</p>

<p>
On a sudden this professional plaint
broke into a bellow of anger and alarm.
<q>Help! Thieves! Murder!</q> he cried.
<q>My money—my hard-earned money!
Some one has stolen my money!</q> No
one appearing to pay the slightest heed
to his outcries, the beggar beat upon
the ground in a very fury of impotent
rage.
</p>

<p>
Tor, standing well out of range of the
<pb n='16'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>whirling staff, regarded the blind man
with a pleased smile. For the moment
he had quite forgotten that he was
hungry. <q>Aha! my very good master,</q>
he cried tauntingly, <q>and who is it who
will fast to-day—ay, and perchance to-morrow!</q>
</p>

<p>
At sound of the shrill childish voice
the beggar sprang to his feet with a vile
imprecation. <q>Is it thou, spawn of the
dust, who hast dared rob me?</q> he
screamed, making a vicious rush in the
direction of the voice. <q>Come hither,
that I may break every bone of thy thieving
body!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What if I choose not to be beaten?</q>
inquired Tor, coolly evading the groping
fingers of the beggar. <q>What if I will
to exchange thy good coin for bread?
Yesterday thou gav’st me naught save a
beating; to-day I have had but a bellyful
<pb n='17'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>of curses. I tell thee I will serve thee no
longer. May Jove, Jehovah, and all
lesser gods be gracious unto thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
With this mocking farewell the boy
darted away, and, being for the moment
almost as unseeing as his late master by
reason of the hunger which tore him
urgently, ran straight into the arms of
a man who had been curiously watching
the scene from the shelter of an archway.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let me go!</q> shrieked Tor, striving
with all his puny strength to writhe out
of the powerful grasp of his captor. <q>Let
me go, I say!</q> Then, like the little animal
that he was, he twisted about and
buried his sharp white teeth in the brown
hand that held him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ouf! verily thou art a wolf-whelp!</q>
cried the stranger, lightly cuffing the
child’s ears. <q>Hold hard, small one, till
<pb n='18'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>I find how thy matters lie with the fellow
yonder.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Give the lad into the hand of his lawful
master, and may heaven reward thee,
noble sir,</q> cried Chelluh, making his way
rapidly toward the two with the aid of
his staff. <q>The boy is mine—alas, that
I should have begotten such an undutiful
one. Yet because of mine infirmity—I
am helpless, as thou seest—yes, but give
him into my hand and I will speedily
requite him for robbing me of my last
coin.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Didst thou steal his money, boy?</q>
asked the stranger, stooping to look into
the child’s pinched face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> said Tor, his big, bright eyes
fixed upon the beggar in manifest terror.
<q>I was hungry. Let me go or I will
bite.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, little dog, thy teeth shall be
<pb n='19'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>broken for that word,</q> mumbled the
beggar, feeling after the child with a
ferocious chuckle. <q>Give him to me—ah!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not so fast, friend, not so fast,</q> said
the stranger quietly, drawing the boy
away from the grimy talons outstretched
to seize him. <q>This is thy son, sayst
thou? Why, then, is the child starving
and naked, whilst thou art sleek and
well covered? Why is he bruised and
bleeding like the dog thou didst call
him, whilst thou art whole?</q>
</p>

<p>
The beggar bared his yellow teeth in
a malevolent smile. <q>Why, herein is a
marvel,</q> he said softly. <q>A noble
stranger—for thy speech betrayeth thee,
kind sir—come to Jerusalem for the
passover, perchance, for love, for war—the
gods alone know thine errand—but
delaying his so honorable affairs, his so
<pb n='20'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>important business, to look to a blind
beggar’s brat. Sacred fire, but I am
bowed to the earth before thy most noble
condescension, who am not worthy to
touch the hem of thy honorable garment.
I have said that the boy is mine. If he
be hungry, if he be naked, if he be
bruised—what is that to a stranger from
Galilee? Truly, he is but a dog of the
gutters, but even a dog hath eyes and
may be useful to one in my misfortune.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wilt thou that I give thee into the
hand of thy father?</q> asked the Galilean
of the child, who no longer struggled to
free himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>The man is not my father,</q> mumbled
Tor hopelessly. <q>He will kill me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou liest, my son, after thy custom,</q>
put in Chelluh, with a triumphant
chuckle. <q>It is easy to kill—yes, and
there is no one to say me nay—easy, but
<pb n='21'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>not profitable. I shall but chasten thee
for thy profit as is enjoined upon every
son of Abraham. Permit me to salute
thee, most honorable stranger, ’tis already
over long that we keep thee from
thy business—my son and I.</q> And,
leaning forward as if to humbly kiss the
stranger’s robe, the beggar laid violent
hands on the trembling child. <q>Oho! I
have my fingers on thee at last, rat of
the gutter. Come now, and we will settle
our matters! Five denarii, it was.
Brr—Veil of the temple! what now?</q>
</p>

<p>
The stranger had forcibly relaxed the
clutch of the bony fingers. <q>Here is
thy money,</q> he said, counting out from
his broad palm the coins which the child
passed over to him with a look of piteous
appeal. <q>Five denarii, saidst thou.
As for the lad, if he hath the proper love
for thee he will doubtless return fast
<pb n='22'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>enough when thou art in kindlier temper;
if not, thou art relieved of his keep.
Come with me, boy, if thou wouldst
eat.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou art a swine!</q> screamed the
beggar. <q>Dost hear me, Galilean? A
swine—swine—swine! Thy father, also,
and the father of thy father, thy mother—sacred
fire! Help! Help!</q>
</p>

<p>
The beggar lay sprawling in the dust,
under a well-directed blow from the
Galilean’s powerful fist. The stranger
stood over him, breathing deep, his dark
eyes flashing baleful fire. Then, shrugging
his shoulders slightly and muttering
certain strange words under his breath,
he stooped, picked up the beggar quite
gently, and set him in his place. <q>Here
is thy staff, thy cup, and thy money,
friend,</q> he said calmly, ignoring the
torrent of imprecation which issued from
<pb n='23'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>the open month of the beggar like a foul
stream. <q>My Master hath taught me
that even such refuse as thou must be
handled with love. But, hark ye, fellow,
no man may defile the name of my
mother and stand before Peter, the fisherman.</q>
</p>

<p>
The beggar strained his sightless eyes
after the departing footfalls. <q>Peter,
the fisherman,</q> he repeated with a
ferocious smile. <q>Ah, most honorable
and never-to-be-forgotten benefactor, I
humbly thank thy noble honor for relating
to me thy name. May, Jove, Jehovah,
and all lesser deities enable me to
suitably requite the man, and I will offer
of my gains a sacrifice—a yearling lamb,
no less. I will, I swear it.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='24'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. A Sparrow Falleth"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="II. A Sparrow Falleth"/>
<head>CHAPTER II<lb/>A SPARROW FALLETH</head>

<p>
The Galilean, having thus made for
himself an enemy, plunged into
one of the narrow streets leading
toward the temple. He was still breathing
deep, and thrust his pilgrim’s staff
fiercely into the red dust of the gloomy
thoroughfare. <q>Who am I that I should
follow a prophet?</q> he demanded of himself
angrily. <q><q>If thine enemy smite thee
smite not thou again,</q> saith my Master;
and behold I have smitten a stranger
and one born blind. Verily, I am glad
that the Nazarene did not see me do it.
Hold, I had forgotten the boy!</q> He
stopped short and presently spied Tor’s
<pb n='25'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>small head running over with sunburnt
curls peeping out from the shelter of a
projecting archway. The boy’s wild,
bright eyes met his own defiantly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou’lt not catch me a second time,
Galilean.</q>
</p>

<p>
The man’s white teeth flashed in a
quick answering smile. <q>He who is
once bitten by a wolf’s whelp in future
remembers and is content.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Did I bite thee to bleeding, Galilean?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Aye, verily, look thou at my hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor laughed aloud. <q>It is well,</q> he
said briefly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, it is not well. ’Tis an evil thing
for a child to bite like a dog. Wilt thou
eat with me, small one?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I bite like a dog because I hate like
a dog and hunger like a dog,</q> replied
Tor slowly. <q>I stole from the beggar,
<pb n='26'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>and thou didst take the money from me
by force. Which is better? Nay, Galilean,
I will not eat with thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
The stranger sat down upon a stone
with an air of indifference. <q>I am
hungry,</q> he said, and, producing a brown
loaf and a handful of olives from his
pouch, began to eat.
</p>

<p>
Little by little the child crept nearer.
Presently he stretched out one puny
hand and snatched a fragment of bread
which the man carelessly let fall.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, thou?</q> said the Galilean, with
an air of surprise, and let fall another
bit. Later he placed a large piece of the
bread on the stone at his side and looked
away at the tops of the houses.
</p>

<p>
<q>Does the hand that bleeds hurt thee
over much, stranger?</q> inquired a small
voice at his elbow.
</p>

<p>
<q>Does a hand that is wounded to bleed<pb n='27'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>ing hurt?</q> repeated the Galilean
gravely. <q>Verily, the smart is grievous;
art satisfied?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why didst thou hold me when I
would not?</q> inquired the child. <q>Was
my doing any business of thine?</q>
</p>

<p>
The man shrugged his shoulders.
<q>Nay,</q> he replied doggedly, <q>it was not.
Moreover, I should have been attending
to the beam in mine own eye. I have
been taught to forbear quarreling—even
for a just cause. I am already punished,
and shall be punished again. <q>Bray a
fool in a mortar,</q> sayeth the wise Solomon,
<q>yet will his folly not depart from
him.</q> Such a fool am I.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who told thee it was an evil thing to
fight, Galilean?</q> asked the boy curiously.
He was sitting quite confidently
now at the stranger’s side, munching
bread and olives. <q>I say it is not evil—<pb n='28'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>that is, unless one is beaten. Then, indeed,
it is evil. But one may always
curse another. I have learned divers
strong curses—ay, I am able to curse a
man or a beast in many tongues.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have a Master, one Jesus of Nazareth,</q>
said the Galilean slowly. <q>He
tells me that I must allow a man who
has smitten me on one cheek to smite the
other also.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course, after thou hast smitten
thine enemy soundly, he will smite thee
again, if he is able. Is thy Master a
gladiator?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God forbid!</q> murmured the Galilean.
He stared thoughtfully at the
famished child, who was devouring the
last crumbs of bread. <q>Art thou
filled?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
Tor shrugged his thin shoulders. <q>Is
the dry bed of Kedron filled with a single
<pb n='29'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>shower?</q> he inquired tersely. <q>I have
eaten. I—</q> He stopped short and fixed
his bright eyes on the Galilean’s hurt
hand, which he had thrust into a fold of
his tunic. <q>Let me see it,</q> he added
timidly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherefore; wouldst thou again
whet thy teeth on me?</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor shook his head. <q>It hurts me,
also, now that I have eaten thy bread,</q>
he faltered. Then to the immense astonishment
of the man, he burst into a
passion of weeping, his rough head
bowed upon his scarred knees. An evil-looking
dog which had been hungrily
watching the scene from an angle in the
wall skulked rapidly toward the child,
and thrust his lean carcass between the
two; the Galilean sprang to his feet with
a muttered imprecation and threatening
up-raised staff.
</p>

<pb n='30'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<p>
<q>Stop!</q> cried Tor, in sudden fury.
<q>’Tis my dog. ’Tis Baladan. Thou
shalt not strike him!</q>
</p>

<p>
The man looked on in horrified amazement
while the child wound his thin arms
about the shaggy neck of the brute, murmuring
gently, <q>See, here is yet a bit of
bread for thee, good Baladan. Eat, my
friend, eat, it is good bread.</q>
</p>

<p>
The dog licked the child’s bare feet
and whined his delight. <q>Didst thou
not know, boy, that dogs are unclean and
evil brutes?</q> demanded the Galilean
with an air of profound disgust. <q>Nay,
thou art thyself unclean and evil, and
I must away to my Master.</q> He turned
his back upon the child and strode away,
his head bent, his eyes fixed gloomily
upon the ground.
</p>

<p>
Tor watched him furtively. Then,
with a word to the dog, which obediently
<pb n='31'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>slunk back into his chosen lair, he trotted
noiselessly after the man. <q>I will see
where the stranger goes,</q> he told himself.
</p>

<p>
The child had not followed the Galilean
far when the dull rumbling of
chariot-wheels and the sharp crack of a
whip warned him out of the narrow
thoroughfare. He flattened himself
against a convenient wall and stared
greedily at the sight. This could be no
less than a Roman official of high rank;
the boy knew it right well; his eyes roved
eagerly over the rich appointments of the
chariot, and fastened inquiringly on the
frowning face of the man who guided the
plunging horses. A second man stood at
the driver’s side, a man wearing a tunic
and toga richly bordered with the imperial
purple.
</p>

<p>
Tor drew his breath sharply in pleased
<pb n='32'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>astonishment. Then he saw that the
chariot was hotly pursued by a crowd of
gamins like himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>’Tis the Roman Pilate himself,</q> he
chuckled, <q>and perchance he will presently
cast out coin like grain from the
fat pouch at his girdle.</q>
</p>

<p>
A shrill cry burst from the child’s lips
as he joined the rabble at the chariot-wheels.
To run, to shout, to feel the glad
thud of the falling coin; to wrestle
fiercely in the dust, to arise victorious, to
eat and drink the fruits of conquest—this
was no new thing to Tor. And what, indeed,
was the random sting of a Roman
lash—even when it chanced to fall on
naked limbs or shoulders—to the glory
of the chase?
</p>

<p>
The man who held the whip plied it
vigorously before and behind with loud
imprecations in an unknown tongue,
<pb n='33'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>while he who wore the imperial purple
stared frowningly into vacancy, his
hands clasped loosely behind his back.
</p>

<p>
Tor’s swift feet gained on the chariot.
<q>Hail, great Pilate!</q> he shouted impudently,
<q>art deaf? art blind? art
palsied? Give us now of the temple
treasure! Ay—give! give!</q>
</p>

<p>
The Roman’s dull eyes flashed baleful
fire. The fact that he had attempted to
seize large sums from the temple treasuries,
and that the Jews hated him for
it, was no secret in Jerusalem. But must
the very gamins of the street taunt him
with the fact? He snatched the lash
from the driver and plied it himself with
a practiced hand.
</p>

<p>
Tor fell back with a shriek of keenest
agony.
</p>

<p>
The chariot and the rabble swept on
and disappeared, leaving the child
<pb n='34'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>writhing on the pavement like a wounded
animal.
</p>

<p>
The whip, fringed cruelly with glistening
barbs of steel, had lashed him full
across the eyes.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='35'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. The Man Who Opened His Eyes"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="III. The Man Who Opened His Eyes"/>
<head>CHAPTER III<lb/>THE MAN WHO OPENED HIS EYES</head>

<p>
To Tor, groaning in the wordless
anguish of his hurts, came a soft
inquiring touch on his heaving
shoulders. Led by that kind instinct
which guides all wounded creatures, the
child had crawled away and hidden himself
from unfriendly eyes in the mouth
of a ruinous sewer hard by. Here he
had lain long hours, exhausted with
agony. The dog snuffed the small
huddled figure from head to foot with
short, anxious whines. Then he fell to
industriously licking the one limp brown
hand which crept out from beneath the
ragged tunic.
</p>

<pb n='36'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<p>
<q>Baladan,</q> whispered Tor, and
shrieked aloud with the intolerable
smart of rising tears in his blinded
eyes.
</p>

<p>
The shriek, faint as it was, reached the
ears of a second boy, who was searching
carefully from side to side of the gloomy
little thoroughfare. <q>’Tis thou, Tor,</q>
he exclaimed, stooping to stare in at the
sewer’s mouth. <q>Art bad hurt?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, Dan, the accursed lash of the
Roman smote my eyes,</q> groaned the
child, and sputtered out some strange
maledictions in the Egyptian tongue,
which he had learned from his late
master.
</p>

<p>
The second boy pursed up his coarse
lips into a soft whistle of comprehension.
Then he bent down and stared briefly
into the drooped face of the half-delirious
sufferer. <q>Body of Bacchus!</q>
<pb n='37'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>he murmured, smiting his bare thigh
with closed fist. <q>One more blind beggar
in Jerusalem.</q> Then raising his
fingers to his lips he gave vent to a shrill
cry of summons. It was promptly answered
by the soft thud of a water-carrier’s
feet and the loud tinkle of his
brazen cups.
</p>

<p>
<q>Give him to drink,</q> commanded
Dan, indicating Tor with a grimy forefinger.
<q>The poor fool hath brought ill-fortune
upon himself. ’Tis the evil eye
of a surety.</q> With that he produced a
copper coin, which the water-carrier acknowledged
with a cup of water from
the goat-skin on his back.
</p>

<p>
<q>I will come again at sunset and give
him to drink,</q> said the water-carrier,
with a sidelong glance of fear and pity.
Then the two departed, leaving Tor to
his misery.
</p>

<pb n='38'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
How the child lived through the days
and weeks that followed only Baladan
knew. The dog warmed his master’s
pinched body at night, keeping at bay
other prowling beasts of the pariah race
which ranged the deserted streets, as
lawless and almost as fierce as wolves.
</p>

<p>
He even fed him, more than once bringing
fragments of bread and fish, stolen
from a vender’s stall at the imminent
peril of his life. Occasionally the friendly
water-carrier visited the suffering boy,
and the little wild children of the street,
swarming like sparrows in the streets of
Jerusalem, shared their infrequent crusts
with him.
</p>

<p>
By slow degrees the anguish of his
wounds grew less poignant. The cruelly
disfigured eyes were indeed wholly darkened,
but they ceased to send burning
shafts of fire to the tortured brain. The
<pb n='39'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>child slept fitfully, ate what he could get,
and one day even smiled. This when
Baladan brought him a meatless bone,
laying it down at his feet with extravagant
expressions of satisfaction.
<q>Nay, good Baladan,</q> murmured Tor,
patting his friend’s shaggy coat; <q>indeed
I am not hungry to-day. Eat, dear
beast,</q> and he thrust the bone into the
dog’s mouth, and closed his sharp teeth
upon it. Baladan understood, and the
two rested together in the sunshine with
something like real content.
</p>

<p>
The charitable water-carrier had bestowed
one of his brazen cups upon the
blind boy, and this with his ruined eyes
became his stock in trade. Little by little
he learned to send forth the dolorous
plaint of the blind mendicant. After a
time he could find his way from place to
place with the aid of the dog. And so
<pb n='40'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>it came to pass that there was one more
blind beggar in Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Once during these evil days of his
darkness Tor fell in with his old master.
It was on this wise: the child, grown
bolder, had made his way farther than his
wont into the more crowded thoroughfares
of the city, and there his shrill cry
for alms sounded loud and clear above
the tumult of the market-place. He
rattled his cup bravely as was the custom
of the professional beggar, sending forth
into the unfriendly world the old familiar
plaint of the beggar, Chelluh. <q>Have
mercy, kind lords of Jerusalem; have
mercy on the sorrows of one born blind!
Kind lord, kind lady, only a denarius, I
beseech thee, and may Jehovah and all
lesser gods be gracious unto thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
Now it chanced that Chelluh himself
had also come to the market-place to beg
<pb n='41'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>alms, and, hearing the child’s voice afar
off, recognized it with the unerring ear
of the blind. <q>Fetch me now to the
voice that crieth my cry,</q> he commanded
the one that led him. And when presently
he was come to the place where
Tor stood in the safe angle of two windowless
walls, he stopped short with a
malevolent smile.
</p>

<p>
<q>Art thou of a surety blind, my son—that
thou stealest my cry for alms as thou
didst once steal my money?</q> he demanded.
</p>

<p>
Tor trembled like a leaf in the wind at
sound of the cruel voice. <q>Alas, I am
indeed blind, good master,</q> he said
beseechingly. <q>Have mercy upon me,
for I—</q>
</p>

<p>
The prayer ended in a muffled shriek
for help as the blind man hurled himself
upon the blind child, griping him in a
<pb n='42'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>very fury of malicious hatred. No one interfered.
What, indeed, was the quarrel
of two beggars in an angle of the wall?
</p>

<p>
Trade pressed hard in Jerusalem as
elsewhere, and a man must mind naught
save his own business if he would prosper.
So no one glanced that way when
the blind man, having satisfied his lust
for revenge, departed, leaving the child’s
limp body upon the ground.
</p>

<p>
Tor was not dead. He was only bruised
and beaten and choked into insensibility,
and after awhile he revived and crawled
feebly away with the faithful Baladan.
His begging-cup was gone, and he no
longer dared to raise his voice to crave
alms from the passers-by. Occasionally
one tossed him a coin or a crust, but for
the most part the child crouched all day
in his corner motionless, starving. And
the days and weeks dragged by.
</p>

<pb n='43'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
He was sitting thus one morning when
the sun had climbed high enough to flood
his darkened nook with yellow light. Tor
could feel the warmth of its radiance in
his chill darkness. He sighed deeply
and spread forth his lean hands, wondering
dully what it would be like to see
once more. He had already forgotten
the blue sky and the moving clouds, the
flutter of green leaves over high garden
walls and the glistening whir of bird-wings
in the sunshine. His night was
endless, unbroken by morning gleam or
noontide glory. It meant cold and hunger
and a thousand nameless miseries
which he endured because he must endure.
It would stretch on and on, he
thought, to some far-off, hopeless end,
when perchance he might sleep to
awaken no more.
</p>

<p>
Tor had looked upon such sleepers
<pb n='44'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>with a scared creeping of the flesh in the
old days of seeing. Now the sleep
seemed good, and quite stupidly and
vaguely he longed for it.
</p>

<p>
Somewhere, afar off, there was shouting
and a sound of voices that chanted
musically. The child listened with the
sharpened attention which had grown to
be his one defence and solace. In the old
days his flying feet would have borne
him swiftly enough to see what was happening.
Now he could only listen, and
wonder.
</p>

<p>
<q>Perhaps ’tis some great prince come
to Jerusalem,</q> he muttered, and tried to
picture to himself the gay pageant of
the marching troops, the gorgeous uniforms,
the jeweled robes of the nobles,
the chariots, the horses. And now the
shouting grew louder, there was a noise
of swift-hurrying feet, of confused ques<pb n='45'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>tions and answers, while above all rose
the clear musical voices of myriads of
children crying in the rhythmic measures
of the temple chorals: <q>Hosanna
to the Son of David! Blessed—Blessed
is the King that cometh in the name
of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor started uncertainly to his feet, a
strange, new longing for something he
knew not what stealing into his starved
soul. Baladan whined uneasily, then,
running to the street-corner and back
again to his helpless master, began to
utter short excited barks.
</p>

<p>
The child’s thin fingers trailed the
rough wall askingly; his timid feet crept
nearer to the jubilant procession. <q>Hosanna—Hosanna
to the King! Hosanna
to the Son of David!</q> He had reached
the open square, and, fearing to go fur<pb n='46'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>ther, he sank down once more in the
shelter of a friendly column, hot tears
stealing from his darkened eyes. <q>Oh,
Baladan,</q> he moaned, <q>if I could only
see!</q>
</p>

<p>
And now the sweet chanting was growing
momently fainter. Tor followed the
procession in fancy. It was moving
toward the temple, he knew,—that great
pile of stone and marble and gold which
towered above the tumultuous streets of
Jerusalem like the glistening palace of a
dream. Now it had passed into the
outer courts, and a great and singular
silence fell upon the city.
</p>

<p>
It was broken after what seemed hours
of waiting by light and rapid footfalls.
<q>Tor,</q> cried an eager, breathless voice.
<q>Where art thou?—Tor!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here!</q> answered the blind boy,
starting to his feet and straining his
<pb n='47'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>sightless eyes in the direction of the
voice. <q>Here am I. What wilt thou,
Dan?</q> For he knew the voice and the
step of his friend.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have come to fetch thee to the temple,</q>
breathed the boy excitedly. <q>Thou
must come quickly, before the King has
gone away to his palace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Did the King scatter coins among the
crowd?</q> asked Tor eagerly. <q>Are the
soldiers giving bread and alms to the
people, as when Pilate came to Jerusalem?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, the man is like no other great
one who ever came to Jerusalem,</q> answered
Dan wonderingly. <q>He is verily
a King though. Didst thou not hear the
people shouting, <q>Blessed is the King
that cometh!</q> Hark you, the man is a
strange King. He wears no crown, no
jewels; he hath no soldiers, no money for
<pb n='48'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>the people. He came into the city riding
on the colt of an ass; but the people cast
even their garments upon the earth before
him. I saw it, and shouted with the
rest; and because I had no coat, I cut a
green branch from a tree and cast it
beneath the feet of his beast. So also
did many others, when they saw what I
had done. They cut palm-branches,
olive-branches, and acacias from fields
and gardens all along the way; ’twas a
great sight! The big turbans came out
in a rage to shut our mouths, but for once
they could not. Come,—thou must
come!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why should I come?</q> said Tor
mournfully. <q>I am only a beggar—and
blind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But thou shalt have thine eyes again,
lad,</q> cried Dan exultantly. <q>The King
is even now laying his hands upon the
<pb n='49'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>blind, the lame, and palsied, and they see
and leap and walk forthwith. I myself
have looked upon it. I will fetch thee to
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But the King would not touch me—a
beggar, and unclean,</q> wailed Tor.
<q>Look you, I am no better than Baladan,
and the Jews hate and despise all dogs.
He would spurn me—spit upon me. Nay,
I will not go.</q>
</p><anchor id="image048"/>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: <q><q>I HAVE SAID IT. I WILL TAKE THEE TO THE KING.</q></q>]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><figure rend="w80" url="images/p048.jpg"><head><q><q>I HAVE SAID IT. I WILL TAKE THEE TO THE KING.</q></q></head><figDesc><q><q>I HAVE SAID IT. I WILL TAKE THEE TO THE KING.</q></q></figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
Dan laid violent hands upon the blind
boy. <q>Thou shalt go with me,</q> he said
loudly. <q>I have said it. I will take
thee to the King, then if he spurn thee—spit
upon thee—Nay, but he will not
spurn thee; I saw him, and I say that he
will not. But if he heal thee not, what
then? I will bring thee again to this
place. There shall no harm befall thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two boys made their way to the
temple enclosure, slipping easily among
<pb n='50'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>the excited multitudes, unnoticed even
as the little brown sparrows which flit
among the great feet of horses in a
crowded thoroughfare. And when they
had come to the place where Jesus was,
they found already gathered great numbers
of blind and lame and withered and
palsied, and the court ringing with the
noise of their petitions mingled with the
jubilant thanksgivings of those already
healed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here, get thee betwixt these two
cripples,</q> whispered Dan urgently.
<q>Fasten thou onto this man’s tunic—so!
Now go, and come again—seeing. I will
wait for thee by this third pillar. Thou
wilt see me.</q>
</p>

<p>
The blind boy stumbled on behind his
crippled guide, his heart beating so loud
in his ears that he could scarce hear what
the Voice said to him. But the thrilling
<pb n='51'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>touch on his sightless eyes sank to the
depths of his soul. He saw—Jesus.
</p>

<p>
Some one was pushing him from behind;
Tor yielded to the pressure without
a word—without a sound. His great
eyes, wide and bright, still remained
fastened upon the man who had healed
him; but he uttered no sound of rejoicing.
</p>

<p>
To Dan, watching beside the third
pillar, came a sudden sickening sense of
defeat. He made his way through the
crowd and again laid forcible hands upon
Tor.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let me alone,</q> commanded Tor
briefly. <q>I want to look at the man.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Canst see him?</q> inquired Dan incredulously.
</p>

<p>
Tor made no answer. He was thinking
confusedly, vaguely, while one fixed
purpose formed and lifted itself like a
great, radiant light in his darkened un<pb n='52'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>derstanding. <q>I shall follow him,</q> he
said aloud, and his thin face shone
strangely. <q>I shall see him always.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Canst thou see, lad?</q> cried Dan,
griping his friend’s shoulders impatiently,
<q>or art thou crazed as well as
blind?</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor turned his bright eyes upon the
other boy. <q>Can I see?</q> he echoed,
and laughed aloud. Then, in a sudden
ecstasy, he leaped upon a balustrade and
shouted aloud the word which he had
heard afar off in his darkness: <q>Hosanna!
Hosanna! Hosanna in the highest!</q>
Myriads of child voices took up
the cry, and it arose into the blue
heavens far—far beyond the smoke of
the sacrificial fires, till it mingled with
the songs of angels before the great white
throne. And there was joy in Heaven.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='53'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. 'The King, My Master'"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IV. 'The King, My Master'"/>
<head>CHAPTER IV<lb/><q>THE KING, MY MASTER!</q></head>

<p>
The sun was setting behind the mountains
before hunger, more potent
than even the temple police with
its flail-like rods of office, had cleared
the great court of the temple. The sick
and blind, the maimed and palsied had
gone away restored, the multitude, sated
with miracle and weary of shouting, followed.
The Nazarene himself, looking
more worn and thoughtful than his wont,
also departed with the twelve, his disciples
bearing themselves haughtily
under the angry eyes of the priests.
</p>

<p>
At last their Master had declared
him<pb n='54'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>self before the nation. All the city had
heard the royal acclamation. The promised
reign of the house of David was
about to be restored in Jerusalem. Already
they felt themselves to be princes
and governors in a kingdom of unimagined
splendor.
</p>

<p>
Peter, the Galilean, as he followed with
the others after the pale, potent worker
of miracles, who was also a King, became
aware of a determined clutch upon his
abba, and, looking down, beheld with
amazement and displeasure the small,
pinched face of Tor. <q>I have nothing
for thee, beggar,</q> he said quickly, and
pulled his garment impatiently away
from the child’s clinging touch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, but I am not begging,</q> said
Tor, in nowise abashed. <q>The man—yonder—is
he thy Master?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What is that to thee?</q> frowned the
<pb n='55'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>future prince of Israel. <q>Get thee gone,
the King is passing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The King—thy Master—healed me
but now of blindness,</q> persisted the
child. <q>What is his name? Nay, I will
not loose thee till I know.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His name is Jesus,</q> said Peter unwillingly.
<q>Now begone.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will not,</q> said Tor positively, <q>for
I also have chosen him for my Master.</q>
But he loosed his hold on the man’s garment
and fell back a few paces. <q>I
shall follow him,</q> he told himself simply.
</p>

<p>
Just what he expected from his new
Master Tor could have told no one. He
did not put the question to himself. He
was again both hungry and thirsty; but
he had cared little for either hunger or
thirst in his evil past. Now he tightened
the rags cheerfully about his middle
in the old familiar way and trotted
noise<pb n='56'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>lessly after the little group of men, in
the midst of which walked his Master.
</p>

<p>
The child was trying dully to recall
what the Galilean had said concerning
this man on the day he had delivered
him out of the hand of Chelluh by the
Damascus gate.
</p>

<p>
The thought of Chelluh brought a new
purpose uppermost. <q>When I find a
convenient season from following my
Master I will return and beat the blind
beggar even as he beat me,</q> he promised
himself, with a new and savage joy in
his restored sight. <q>He that hath eyes
is truly a god, and to know this one might
well be blind for a season.</q>
</p>

<p>
His new Master, surrounded by his little
guard, had passed quite out of the city
by this time, and all were walking
swiftly on one of the level Roman roads
which bound Jerusalem to its heathen
<pb n='57'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>Emperor. Tor followed unperceived in
the gathering dusk of evening. After
a little the party reached a small village,
entered it, and paused before a large and
beautiful garden enclosure, where they
were evidently expected, for they were
immediately admitted and the doors
shut fast behind them.
</p>

<p>
Tor marked the place well, then, not
knowing what else to do, he returned to
Jerusalem, found Baladan, and spent the
night in one of his old haunts near the
Damascus Gate.
</p>

<p>
When the child awoke in the morning
the marvelous events of the previous day
floated before his wide eyes like the misty
fragments of a half-forgotten dream.
<q>Was I indeed blind?</q> he asked himself;
<q>or was that also an evil dream of
night?</q> Baladan’s anxious whine recalled
him more fully to his waking
<pb n='58'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>senses, and he sprang up to find Dan
shying olive-stones at him from a neighboring
wall. <q>Sleepy-head!</q> quoth the
gamin, discharging another volley of
stones. <q>Look you, lad, there is much
to be seen in Jerusalem to-day—if, indeed,
the man restored thy sight—the
passover pilgrims are coming in by thousands.
I have already begged breakfast
for me and for thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I can see as well as ever,</q> said Tor
briefly. <q>But I must first find my Master.
Give me the loaf and I will go.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Beggar!</q> cried Dan, tossing his comrade
a fragment of a loaf and half a
dozen olives, <q>what hast thou to do with
a King? Come, we will lead a merry life
this week; the pilgrims are laden with
goods, and one with light fingers and
lighter heels need lack nothing.</q> The
boy snapped his brown fingers and
<pb n='59'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>executed a sort of savage dance in the
exuberance of his spirits.
</p>

<p>
<q>He said, <q>Do not beat thine enemy;
but if thine enemy smite thee, let him
smite thee again, if he will,</q></q> said Tor,
munching his bread reflectively. <q>There
is Chelluh; he hath beaten me, not once
nor twice only, but many times.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who said <q>Do not smite thine
enemy</q>?</q> demanded Dan, staring.
</p>

<p>
<q>My Master said it. He said it to the
Galilean, not to me. I will, therefore,
beat Chelluh; also I will steal his money
and give it to my Master.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My Master—my Master!</q> mocked
Dan. <q>How dost thou know that the
man will have thee for a servant?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I do not know; but if I will serve him,
then will he be my Master whether he
will or no. And I will serve him. I
have said it.</q>
</p>

<pb n='60'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
<q>How?</q> persisted Dan.
</p>

<p>
Tor stared about him reflectively.
<q>I will bring him blind folks to
heal,</q> he said at last. <q>I can do
that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou art a rare fool,</q> said Dan conclusively.
<q>I am off for the pilgrim
encampment outside the walls. Look
you, beggar, when thou art through with
serving the King, thy Master, thou wilt
find me there eating the fat and drinking
the sweet,</q> and with a laugh of scorn
the boy darted away.
</p>

<p>
Left to himself, Tor sat for a long time
deep in thought; an astonishing picture
had presented itself to his mind, born out
of the unseen whence cometh every
good and perfect thing in all the visible
world. The child seemed to see himself
leading his old master, Chelluh, to the
healing King, and Chelluh, restored to
<pb n='61'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>sight, crying, <q>Hosanna, hosanna in the
highest!</q>
</p>

<p>
Far off and faint upon the morning
air a voice arose, rising and falling in
dolorous monotone. Tor knew it. It
was the voice of Chelluh begging alms.
</p>

<p>
He arose and ran with swift feet to the
place which he had hated and avoided
even in his dreams, and there in the
familiar angle of the wall sat the beggar,
shaking his empty cup, the sun falling
full upon his evil face. Tor stood quite
still and gazed at the blind man with his
Christ-touched eyes, and for the first time
in his short life, loving pity for another
welled up within him. <q>Master,</q> he
said, in a low voice. Then he drew
nearer, and spoke in a louder voice;
<q>Chelluh.</q> He would call no man master
save one.
</p>

<p>
The blind beggar beat upon his cup
<pb n='62'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>with his horny knuckles. <q>Who calls
me?</q> he asked, scarce believing his
truthful ears which told him whose voice
had spoken. <q>Who calls me?</q> he repeated,
trembling. <q>I choked the little
dog to death, yet it is his voice that
speaks.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou didst not kill me,</q> said Tor.
<q>I am alive, and see once more. Yesterday
the King, my Master, healed me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lies!</q> mumbled Chelluh, shaking his
great head,—<q>thou wast always a liar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This is no lie that I tell thee.
Wouldst thou receive thy sight also?
Come, I will lead thee to my Master. He
will heal thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Chelluh reflected for a moment. Physically
he was stronger than the puny
child. Yet he distrusted his words.
<q>Thou art plotting mischief against me,
gutter rat,</q> he growled, <q>I know thee.</q>
</p>

<pb n='63'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
<q>If I plotted mischief I should have
come upon thee suddenly, and run away
ere thou wast aware of me,</q> replied Tor.
<q>I am no man’s fool, but I serve a new
Master, one Jesus. ’Tis for my Master I
do this. He heals blind folk, therefore
I fetch blind folk to him to be healed.
Thus I serve my Master. Wilt thou
come?</q>
</p>

<p>
Chelluh rose slowly to his feet. <q>I
will come,</q> he said; <q>but if thou hast
lied to me, little dog, thou knowest the
strength of my hands, and shalt know
again. This time I will kill thee beyond
a peradventure.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor shuddered at the familiar clutch
of the knotted fingers on his slender
shoulders. Yet he walked bravely forward.
<q>So I serve my Master,</q> he said
aloud.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='64'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. Deep Calleth unto Deep"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="V. Deep Calleth unto Deep"/>
<head>CHAPTER V<lb/>DEEP CALLETH UNTO DEEP</head>

<p>
<q>Where is the man who heals the
blind?</q> demanded Chelluh,
leaning heavily on the child.
</p>

<p>
Tor trembled, but he answered boldly
enough. <q>He will be in the court of the
Gentiles healing the blind.</q>
</p>

<p>
There was a great concourse of people
crowding the street which led up to the
temple, and amongst them numerous
cripples, palsied men on litters, sick children
in the arms of anxious, wild-eyed
mothers, and blind beggars, led like Chelluh
by willing guides.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, the King is in the temple,</q>
re<pb n='65'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>peated Tor confidently. Then he shouted
<q>Hosanna!</q> in his shrill childish voice,
as he had done the day before. The cry
was echoed by myriads of voices both
far and near.
</p>

<p>
Chelluh’s heavy hand descended upon
his guide’s curly head. <q>Be silent,
fool,</q> he hissed. <q>There is tumult
ahead. Keep clear of the crowd, I say,
and look sharp!</q>
</p>

<p>
They were near the main entrance of
the temple now, and the stream of newcomers
was met by an excited mob of
people coming out. Imprecations, shouts,
and loud angry cries blended confusedly
with the whir of moving wings, for a
great cloud of doves hovered uncertainly
over the place, now flying, now settling
on the roofs and pinnacles of the marble
porticoes. Chelluh stopped determinedly
and snuffed the air like an animal.
</p>

<pb n='66'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<p>
<q>What is going on within?</q> he demanded
of Tor.
</p>

<p>
The question was answered by a
woman in a foreign head-dress who
chanced to pause in the crowd beside
them. <q>The Nazarene has thrust out
the sellers of doves and the money-changers
from the great court,</q> she said
laughingly. <q>With these eyes I saw it.
The Prophet cast down the tables with
no gentle hand, loosed the doves, and
drove out the craven Jews before him
like a flock of frightened sheep. ’Twas
a great sight. Also, the money was scattered
all over the court among the multitude.
Even I, a Gentile, am the richer
for it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Money?</q> exclaimed the blind beggar
greedily. <q>Come, let us go in, I would
I had eyes that I might glean of this
harvest.</q>
</p>

<pb n='67'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
<q>The man gives eyes also for the asking,</q>
said the woman indifferently. <q>I
have witnessed miracles of healing till
I am weary of them. The Jew is a great
magician, surely; but his own countrymen
hate him, and the Romans care
naught for miracles, so betwixt the two
he will perchance fall to the ground.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor was not listening, he was watching
for a good opening through which to
pilot his blind charge. <q>When thou art
healed, thou wilt become a servant of the
King,</q> he said softly in the ear of the
blind beggar.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ay, and will I?</q> sneered Chelluh;
<q>and what will I do then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fetch blind folks to be healed,</q> said
the child simply. <q>Now I see him,</q> he
added, with joyful certainty. <q>Do but
follow quickly and thou shalt be blind no
longer!</q>
</p>

<pb n='68'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<p>
Like the showers and sunshine of the
Father which bless the good and the evil
alike through all the years of all the
ages, so was the healing power of him
who manifested the Father in every
act of his life. And so it came to pass
that many came to be healed of blindness
in those last great days, and
went away with seeing eyes and blind
souls.
</p>

<p>
Chelluh’s first act after receiving his
sight was to stare hard at Tor. <q>I am
minded to know thee again,</q> he said
thoughtfully.
</p>

<p>
The boy shivered beneath his gaze.
Chelluh with seeing eyes was even more
terrible than Chelluh blind. Those devouring
eyes were roving like the eyes of
a beast of prey over the excited crowd.
They fastened at last on a man who stood
not far from the Nazarene. <q>I know
<pb n='69'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>that man’s voice,</q> said Chelluh. <q>Who
and what is he?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He is a servant of the King,</q> said
Tor. <q>His name is Peter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His name is Peter,</q> repeated Chelluh,
and struck his palms together softly.
He turned and without another word
plunged into the crowd and was gone.
</p>

<p>
Tor forgot him presently. He was
edging his way nearer and nearer to the
wondrous Voice. Jesus was teaching
the people, and his words fell upon the
child’s ignorant ears with a strange and
potent charm. He could not understand;
but he listened because he loved; and,
listening and loving, he comprehended
something of what was being said, even
as a babe discerns the speech of its
mother. Love answereth love, as deep
calleth unto deep.
</p>

<p>
At night Tor followed his Master and
<pb n='70'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>the twelve when they went forth out of
the city to lodge in the house of his
friends in Bethany. This time the child
slept on the ground in the shelter of the
garden wall, begging a crust and a cup
of water from one of the villagers at
dawn. No one questioned the boy and
so he was able again to follow almost
at their heels when the little party set
out for Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
There was a withered fig-tree near the
wayside, and Tor heard the Galilean,
Peter, pause and say to his Master,
<q>Rabbi, behold the fig-tree which thou
cursedst is withered away.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Jesus looked upon the withered
tree and answered the Galilean on this
wise: <q>Have faith in God; for I tell thee
that whosoever shall say unto this mountain,
Be thou taken up and cast into the
sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but
<pb n='71'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>shall believe that what he saith cometh to
pass; he shall have it. Therefore I say
unto you, All things whatsoever ye pray
and ask for, <hi rend='italic'>believe that ye have received
them</hi>, and ye shall have them. And
whensoever ye stand praying, forgive, if
ye have aught against any one; that your
Father also which is in heaven may forgive
you your trespasses.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor was crouching in the shelter of a
bush and heard every word distinctly.
His thin face burned with excitement.
<q>He said <q>whosoever,</q></q> he murmured.
<q>He said <q>whosoever.</q></q> Tor knew
something of the custom of prayer. Many
times he had seen the rich Pharisees
standing motionless at the street-corners
praying. Also, he had begged in the
temple court, where many persons prayed
aloud. For himself, he never prayed.
The God of the Jews regarded not
beg<pb n='72'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>gars, he told himself. Now as he
crouched behind the bush, listening to
the departing footsteps of the thirteen
men, he began to say over to himself the
word <q>Father,</q> which the man who had
opened his eyes said so often.
</p>

<p>
He repeated it softly to himself many
times. Then he sprang up and followed
hard after his Master, vaguely comforted
and glad at heart.
</p>

<p>
The day was a long one, passed mainly
in the great Court of the Gentiles, and
Tor, mingling with every gaping crowd
which surrounded the Nazarene, was
puzzled and troubled by much that he
saw and heard. There was no shouting
of Hosanna to-day, no royal acclamations.
The people stood close in serried
ranks and listened doubtfully to the
strange teachings of the King in the
seamless robe—the King who wore no
<pb n='73'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>crown and whose followers bore no arms.
He was telling stories to the multitude,
stories so simple that even a beggar
could understand them. The child
pressed close, so close that he could have
touched the sandaled feet of the man
who had opened his eyes. And so he
listened to the stories of the father and
his two undutiful sons; the absent lord of
the vineyard and his wicked servants;
the generous king who made a marriage
feast for his son, and how it befell that
the very beggars were gathered into the
feast. The child smiled and trembled
and wept aloud beneath the power of that
wondrous Voice; more than once the
Master’s deep eyes rested upon the small
upturned face with its wistful look of
adoration.
</p>

<p>
And once, as he was speaking, the hand
of Jesus rested for a moment on the
<pb n='74'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>rough curls of the beggar’s head. Ah,
the rapture of that moment! Tor knew
now deep in his heart that he was the
accepted servant of the King. He could
have remained there forever listening to
the stories; but the temple police began
to clear away the crowd with loud authoritative
cries and random thrusts of
their gilded poles of office.
</p>

<p>
<q>Make way!</q> they shouted. <q>Make
way for the holy and reverend chief
priests and the honorable elders of the
Sanhedrim!</q>
</p>

<p>
Through the narrow passage thus
cleared there came presently in great
pomp and glory a stately delegation
from the supreme council of the Jewish
hierarchy. The chief priests wished to
question publicly this worker of miracles—this
teller of strange parables, who
openly wrought his mighty works in the
<pb n='75'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>temple of Jehovah without their will
or permission. <q>By what authority
doest thou these things?</q> they demanded.
<q>And who gave thee this
authority?</q>
</p>

<p>
And Jesus, calm and unafraid, answered
them after their own custom with
another question. <q>I also will ask you
one thing,</q> he said, <q>which if ye tell
me, I likewise will tell you by what authority
I do these things. The baptism
of John, whence was it? from heaven or
from men?</q>
</p>

<p>
The gorgeously-robed official who had
put the question glanced about him at
the hostile faces of the multitude, with
a truculent air of scorn and contempt.
Thus mumbling and stammering angrily
in the midst of his great beard, he turned
and conferred in a whisper with his companions.
<q>If we say, <corr sic="(quote removed)">From</corr> heaven,</q> he
<pb n='76'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>muttered, <q>the fellow will ask, Why then
did ye not believe him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ay,</q> quoth another, <q>but if we say,
From men, there is the multitude to be
reckoned with, for all hold that John was
a prophet.</q>
</p>

<p>
And so they presently faced the Master,
their fierce eyes under the glittering
insignia of the priestly office glaring
at the calm, pale Man of Nazareth. <q>We
know not,</q> they said.
</p>

<p>
And Jesus replied, <q>Neither tell
I you by what authority I do these
things.</q>
</p>

<p>
The priests withdrew in sullen silence,
and the telling of strange stories went
on; but Tor, somehow swept from his
position by the shifting crowd, found
himself near the defeated priests. They
had paused to listen with the others, and
were standing with folded arms and
<pb n='77'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>sneering faces by one of the great pillars
of the portico.
</p>

<p>
Tor slipped behind the column, of a
sudden all ears. These men were speaking
in a half whisper of the King, his
Master. They hated him; Tor was sure
of it. <q>The fellow will ruin us if we
cannot stop his blatant mouth,</q> said
one. <q>Listen now to his open threats:
<q>The kingdom of God shall be taken
away from you, and shall be given to a
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And he calleth himself our King,</q>
sneered another. <q>A pretty pass hath
the chosen people come to when the rabble
choose a Nazaritish carpenter for
King. Aha, I laugh at him!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>’Tis no time for mirth,</q> growled another.
<q>The multitudes are ever agog
for some new thing; stoning or
cruci<pb n='78'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>fixion is better than laughter for such
an one. Hark you, the thing must be
put down and speedily. I know a way
and a man; he—</q> The voice dropped to
low whispers, and Tor, trembling with
vague fright, and scarce knowing what
he did, wriggled his way through the
crowd toward the white-robed figure of
Jesus.
</p>

<p>
Peter, the Galilean, was also talking
excitedly with a man in the outskirts of
the crowd. Tor fixed his eyes upon the
tall, broad-shouldered fisherman with
some confidence. <q>I will tell him,</q> he
said to himself, and hovered expectantly
near, waiting for an opportunity to
speak. <q>He must declare himself unmistakably
and at once,</q> the small,
dark-faced man was saying with an impatient
gesture. <q>This telling of pretty
tales and working of miracles has gone
<pb n='79'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>on over long, say I. We should arm ourselves
and make ready, and the Sanhedrim
must be won over by some great
sign from heaven. We can do nothing
without them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And I say let the Master work out his
plans as it pleaseth him,</q> said Peter
boldly. <q>Saw you not his kingly air on
Sunday, Judas? He is every inch a
King, I tell thee, and able to make of us
princes and high priests—ay, and to
sweep away all oppressors by the word
of his mouth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Able, perhaps,</q> muttered Judas
shaking his head, <q>but I doubt him. The
man careth nothing for money—nothing
for power. I know him. What are his
plans? Does any one know them? Do
we who are nearest him dare ask him?
He is, perchance, nothing more than a
dreamer, and our ambitions and hopes
<pb n='80'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>are founded upon the shifting sands of
his visions. Nay, I know what thou
wouldst say, Simon. But thou art no
statesman—no patriot. I hear the chosen
people groaning in their slavery. I see
the iron heel of Rome about to crush out
the last lingering life of the nation. Will
this man save us? Can he, I ask? Or
is he—</q> Judas choked convulsively, and
tore at the neck of his garment with
quivering hands. <q>I am half mad with
the torture of it,</q> he groaned, <q>the—the
waiting—the doubt; I—I fear that he—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, thou art a truculent and unbelieving
fellow at heart,</q> said Peter
easily. <q>Didst hear how the Master answered
the priests but now? I could
have laughed aloud to see them slink
away like whipped curs.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Like whipped curs—yes,</q> muttered
the other. <q>But they will return anon
<pb n='81'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>like ravening wolves, unless he declare
himself. ’Tis folly—folly!</q> He turned
and plunged hastily into the crowd, and
Peter, left to himself, began to smite his
great hands softly together. <q>He hath
the power to put them all to silence,</q> he
said half aloud. <q>He will do it—let no
one fear!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I fear,</q> said Tor, suddenly speaking
at the fisherman’s elbow. <q>I fear—<hi rend='italic'>for
him</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What now, small one,</q> quoth Peter,
staring down at the child with a displeased
shrug. <q>Have I not told thee to
keep thy distance?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but I will not,</q> said Tor
doggedly. <q>Listen, Galilean. I heard
the men in long robes speak of <hi rend='italic'>him</hi>.
They hate him. They will kill him, if
they can. Take care of him—<hi rend='italic'>thou</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My Master can take care of himself,
<pb n='82'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>boy,</q> said Peter boastfully. <q>He is a
King; also, I am his servant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Where is thy sword, servant of a
King?</q> demanded Tor, eyeing him
doubtfully.
</p>

<p>
<q>My sword—my sword?</q> stammered
the fisherman. <q>I have no sword.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then get one,</q> advised Tor briefly.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='83'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. Rejected of Men"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VI. Rejected of Men"/>
<head>CHAPTER VI<lb/>REJECTED OF MEN</head>

<p>
The Galilean shook his great shoulders
doubtfully as he stared after
the small, agile figure of the boy,
darting and doubling, twisting and turning
through the huddled masses of people
gathered about his Master. <q>By the
double veil—</q> he began, and stopped
short with a perplexed frown. <q><q>Swear
not at all,</q> saith my Master, yet my unruly
tongue doth ever betray me. Truly,
the tongue is a fire, tamed by no man,
not even its owner.</q>
</p>

<p>
There was some new excitement brewing,
for the fisherman was thrust rudely
to one side by a guard of brawny temple
<pb n='84'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>police, who advanced as before, crying
out to the people to fall back in the name
of the Sanhedrim. The group of men
which followed close on the heels of the
guard forced another profane exclamation
from the unguarded lips of the Galilean.
<q>Herodians!</q> he muttered, <q>and
Pharisees. Now, what doth this portend?</q>
</p>

<p>
The question was answered by Judas,
who reappeared at the moment, his dark
face distorted by a savage sneer.
<q>Wouldst know why these courtiers of
Herod have come to the Nazarene, fisherman?
Well, I can tell thee. Our chosen
Master hath of late permitted himself to
be hailed King of the Jews, yet hath he
not pledged the nation to the support of
his claim, nor even armed us, his chosen
followers. What then? Herod is a
paltry tetrarch of Galilee, he plots and
<pb n='85'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>schemes at Rome for his father’s crown.
Thou mayst know, fisherman,—unless
thy head be too thick for understanding—that
the pretensions of the carpenter’s
son have been widely noised abroad, and
have already reached the ears of royal
Herod. Jesus of Nazareth must take
heed to himself or he will presently be
dealt with after the manner of John the
Baptist—or worse.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Get thee behind me, prophet of evil,</q>
growled Peter; <q>thou hast ever the dismal
croak of the raven. What if Herod
intends to acknowledge Jesus as the lawful
descendant of David and the promised
Messiah? The tetrarch is, after all,
a Jew, and looks for the deliverance of
Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
Judas laughed silently, his narrow
eye-slits shooting arrows of scorn at the
big fisherman. <q>What if the stones of
<pb n='86'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>the temple should suddenly become
armed troops for the defense of our
sapient Master?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
<q>It might well be so,</q> murmured
Peter thoughtfully. <q>Did he not walk
upon the sea? Did he not control the
lightnings and the tempest? Did he not
feed the five thousand with one man’s
victual? Hist now, they are speaking to
him!</q>
</p>

<p>
The courtiers of Herod, garbed as
Roman exquisites, perfumed and smiling,
were addressing themselves to the man
of Nazareth. They prefaced their words
with extravagant obeisances, tendered
with mock humility. Behind them stood
the Pharisees alert and watchful.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen!</q> repeated the fisherman, his
honest face flushed with expectancy.
</p>

<p>
<q>We know that thou art true, Rabbi,</q>
began the spokesman of the party, <q>and
<pb n='87'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>carest for the opinion of no man; for thou
regardest not the person of men, but
teachest the way of God in truth.
Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar,
or not? Shall we give, or shall we not
give?</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus faced his inquisitors, erect and
calm, his deep eyes searching their
hypocritical hearts. There was silence
for a full minute, while the crowded listeners
craned their necks for his reply,
and Judas clenched his knotted hands in
a very agony of suspense. This was the
supreme moment. Tribute to Cæsar, or
no? Tribute to the usurping heathen
emperor, or allegiance to the throne of
David—which?
</p>

<p>
The carpenter’s son whitened slowly
under the fiery eyes which scorched him
with their brutal passions. Then came
his answer—spoken slowly, deliberately:
<pb n='88'/><anchor id='Pg088'/><q>Why tempt ye me? Give me a penny,
that I may see it.</q>
</p>

<p>
The perfumed exquisite from Herod’s
court languidly fingered the gold pieces
in his pouch, with a pitying smile for this
penniless pretender to a throne, and
presently, drawing therefrom one of the
lesser coins of the empire, gave it to the
Nazarene.
</p>

<p>
<q>Whose is this image and superscription?</q>
demanded Jesus, his voice ringing
out in the crowded place like the peal of
a great bell.
</p>

<p>
<q>Cæsar’s,</q> replied the courtier, bowing
servilely at mention of that name of
power.
</p>

<p>
Then came the wondrous answer, forever
solving all questions of human
fealty: <q>Render unto Cæsar the things
that are Cæsar’s, and unto God the things
that are God’s.</q>
</p>

<pb n='89'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<p>
Instantly there arose from the multitude
a great hum of approval. <q>Well
spoken!</q> <q>Thou hast said!</q> <q>Behold
a Solomon in our midst!</q> burst from
one and another in deep-throated chorus.
And the Pharisees, wrathful and menacing,
withdrew with the crestfallen
Herodians.
</p>

<p>
<q>Said I not that he was a match for
the best of them?</q> cried Peter, showing
his white teeth in a great laugh of relief
and triumph. <q>Aye, our Master is king
of a surety, wiser than any scribe is he,
keener than a Damascus blade having
two edges.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Judas groaned aloud. <q>What a
moment to have declared himself!</q> he
muttered. <q>And lost—ay, lost forever.
My God! what and who is the man?</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor had wriggled his small body
through the dense crowd back to the feet
<pb n='90'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>of Jesus, where he crouched ready to
spring like a faithful dog at the throat of
any man who should threaten his Master.
<q>I have no sword,</q> muttered the child
to himself, <q>but I have two hands well
furnished with nails, also, I have teeth
like the teeth of Baladan. Let the men
in long robes beware.</q>
</p>

<p>
But as yet no man durst lay so much as
a finger on that seamless robe. Other
tempters wearing great turbans, bearded,
scowling, came to ask mocking questions
concerning the resurrection. And on the
insensate ears of the multitude fell those
significant words which the world has
neither comprehended nor believed to
this day: <q>But as touching the resurrection
of the dead, have ye not read that
which was spoken unto you by God, saying,
I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
<pb n='91'/><anchor id='Pg091'/><hi rend='italic'>God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Afterward the Pharisees, rejoicing in
the discomfiture of their hated rivals, the
Sadducees, gathered again like barking
wolves about a hunted quarry. <q>Master,</q>
asked one of them hypocritically,
<q>which is the great commandment in the
law?</q> For, they argued, if we can
but draw this witless carpenter’s son
into a discussion on the law we shall be
able to put him to open shame before the
multitude.
</p>

<p>
Jesus answered the scribe without
hesitation: <q>The first commandment is,
Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God, the
Lord is one; and thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. The second is
this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
<pb n='92'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>thyself. There is none other commandment
greater than these.</q>
</p>

<p>
He who had asked the question
trembled under the searching eyes of the
Nazarene. Of a sudden those familiar
words of the temple ritual blazed within
his darkened soul like a great light. And
he answered truth with truth. <q>Master,
thou hast well said that he is one;
and there is none other but he; and
to love him with all the understanding,
and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbor as himself, is much more than
all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Jesus said to this man: <q>Thou art
not far from the kingdom of God.</q> But
upon the others, who were openly sneering
at their spokesman and muttering
anathemas in their great beards, he presently
launched the most terrible words
ever spoken to man. Ghastly woes upon
<pb n='93'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>woes reverberated in their astonished
ears, while all the rottenness of their
guilty hearts was suddenly torn open and
laid bare for the rabble to gaze upon.
<q>Serpents, offspring of vipers,</q> he
called them; and hissing, crawling, stinging,
they crept away to their dens in
murderous haste, while the fickle multitude,
roused to a very frenzy of excitement,
rocked and wept under the
prophetic wail of his closing words,
heavy with swift-approaching doom: <q>O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killeth the
prophets, and stoneth them that are sent
unto her! how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as
a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your
house is left unto you desolate. For I
say unto you, Ye shall not see me
henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed
<pb n='94'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Judas, who had heard and seen
all, staggered away, blind and crazed
with anger and despair. <q>Ruin—ruin!</q>
he muttered. <q>I see naught but black
ruin! In his rash folly the man hath cut
the last rope of safety. There is but one
chance—one. He must again quell the
storm he has raised about our ears with
the word of his power, and I—yes, I will
force him to it. I swear it!</q>
</p>

<p>
In that same hour the beggar, Tor, saw
and heard what he has never forgotten
to this moment of his eternity—nor yet
will forget. Certain Greeks had come
up to keep the passover at Jerusalem, for
they had abandoned the pagan rites of
Rome and Athens, and were trying to
serve the invisible Jehovah. These
heard speedily of the new prophet who
<pb n='95'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>gathered the whole city to hear him in
the temple, and they desired mightily to
see him.
</p>

<p>
When one will see Jesus, even to this
hour, his desire is granted to him. So
then these Gentiles presently set their
longing eyes upon the man they sought.
And Jesus, looking with prophetic gaze
adown the vista of coming centuries, saw
in these foreigners, with their clear, fair
faces and candid eyes, those who should
truly accept him as their king, understanding
as the Jews could not the
glories of his invisible kingdom. And
seeing thus all that must be, he said to
those about him: <q>The hour is come that
the Son of man should be glorified.</q>
</p>

<p>
And again he said: <q>Except a grain of
wheat fall into the earth and die, it
abideth by itself alone; but if it die, it
beareth much fruit. He that loveth his
<pb n='96'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>life loseth it; and he that hateth his life
in this world shall keep it unto life
eternal. If any man serve me, let
him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my servant be: if any man
serve me, him will the Father honor.
Now is my soul troubled; and what shall
I say? Father, save me from this hour.
But for this cause came I unto this hour.
Father, glorify thy name.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then came a great Voice out of the
unseen. <q>I have both glorified it, and
will glorify it again.</q>
</p>

<p>
The people heard the sound of the
Voice and trembled. But not to every
man is it given to hear aright; so some
said, <q>It thundered,</q> and rolled foolish
eyes toward the cloudless heavens.
</p>

<p>
Others, awe-stricken, whispered, <q>An
angel hath spoken to him.</q>
</p>

<p>
To these Jesus spake presently. <q>This
<pb n='97'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>voice hath not come for my sake, but for
your sakes. Now is the judgment of
this world: now shall the prince of this
world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then one of the scribes, shaken out of
his hypocrisy by the thunder of that
celestial Voice, asked in all sincerity:
<q>We have heard out of the law that the
Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest
thou, The Son of man must be lifted
up? who is this Son of man?</q>
</p>

<p>
And Jesus, divinely patient, answered
once again: <q>Yet a little while is the
light among you. Walk while ye have
the light, that darkness overtake you
not: and he that walketh in the darkness
knoweth not whither he goeth. While
ye have the light, believe on the light,
that ye may become sons of light.</q>
</p>

<pb n='98'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
And with that word he went away and
hid himself, and no man saw him for
many hours.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='99'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VII. Felicia"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VII. Felicia"/>
<head>CHAPTER VII<lb/>FELICIA</head>

<p>
Stronger even than the cords of
love are the cords of habit. If a
man has shaken a brazen cup and
bellowed for alms for more than a score
of years, the cup and the cry will have
become a part of himself, not lightly to
be shaken off. Chelluh, with eyes, hungered
as before, and as before he coveted
money for his few and evil pleasures.
So it came to pass that after a day spent
in sight-seeing, he was again squatting
comfortably in his familiar corner by the
Damascus gate, his eyes closed, his horny
knuckles beating a monotonous accompaniment
to the familiar mendicant’s
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>whine: <q>Have mercy, kind lords of
Jerusalem! Have mercy on the sorrows
of one born blind! Kind lords, beautiful
ladies, only a denarius, I beseech of
you!</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor, searching anxiously for his new
Master in every corner of the city, came
upon the beggar unawares, and stopped
short in indignant amaze. <q>Did not the
King, my Master, give thee sight but
yesterday?</q> he demanded.
</p>

<p>
Chelluh opened his eyes with a muttered
malediction. <q>Who art thou,</q> he
snarled, <q>to question me? How else
shall I live?</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor looked hard at the man’s great
bulk. <q>There are many laborers working
in the great quarries yonder,</q> he
answered slowly. <q>The Romans pay
every man of them a silver penny.</q>
</p>

<p>
Chelluh replied to this suggestion with
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>a string of curses spoken in three languages.
He ended by hurling a great
stone at the lad’s head. Badly aimed,
the missile crashed over the wall of a
garden hard by.
</p>

<p>
There was a moment of silence, during
which Chelluh scuttled rapidly away.
Then a small door in the wall was suddenly
thrown open and two men darted
out. They looked up and down the narrow
street, and seeing no one but Tor,
who stood staring in stupefied silence
after the beggar, they seized the boy and
dragged him into the enclosure, locking
and barring the door behind them.
</p>

<p>
<q>’Tis an evil offspring of beggars that
hath done this mischief,</q> exclaimed one
of the men angrily. <q>Did I not say it?</q>
</p>

<p>
The other man fixed his eyes on Tor.
<q>Didst thou throw the stone that broke
the great vase yonder?</q> he asked.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
Tor’s wild, bright eyes followed the
man’s accusing finger to the spot where
an urn carven from costly marble lay in
ruins amid a tangle of bright flowers.
<q>I did not throw the stone,</q> he said.
</p>

<p>
<q>Lies!</q> cried the first man, stamping
his foot. <q>Why question a dog? Give
the fellow to me; I will scourge him
soundly and thrust him forth. His bleeding
back will, perchance, warn others
of his sort to keep their distance from
the palace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am not a dog,</q> said Tor boldly.
<q>I am the servant of a King. I was
looking for my Master, and another
hurled the stone at me. But because the
man was lately healed of blindness he
could not throw a stone with ease, and,
therefore, it came over the wall.</q>
</p>

<p>
One of the men shook with laughter at
this speech. <q>Nay, but thou art a pretty
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>liar,</q> he said at last. <q>The servant of
a King! aye, thou dost look the part
rarely! May I ask thee the name of thy
royal Master?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His name is Jesus,</q> said Tor. <q>I
was blind, and he gave me eyes. Therefore,
I serve him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The faces of both men had grown suddenly
serious. They exchanged significant
glances. <q>Better hold the boy till
my lord’s return; he will, perchance, wish
to question him of the matter,</q> said one.
And the other nodding, gripped the child
roughly by the shoulder, and presently
thrust him into an empty scullery of an
inner court.
</p>

<p>
Tor flung himself against the heavy
door in a sudden fury of despair. <q>Let
me out!</q> he screamed. <q>Let me out! I
must find my Master.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then, as no one paid the slightest heed
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>to his outcries, he began to look about
him for some means of escape. The one
window high in the wall was heavily
barred, and there was no opening in the
small, dark chamber save the door by
which he had entered, and this was fast
locked on the outside.
</p>

<p>
The boy tore at his rags like a trapped
animal. Then spying a great sealed jar
in one corner he began to scratch savagely
at its cover. <q>If it be wine,</q> he
muttered, <q>I will drink my fill for once.
Nay, I will do more. I will spill upon the
earth all that I cannot drink. I hate the
men who have thrust me into this place!
Also, I hate Chelluh; some day I will kill
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive, if ye have aught against
any one; that your Father may forgive
you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Who had spoken? The beggar child
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>ceased his beast-like clawing at the
sealed lid of the jar; his flushed face
paled slowly. <q>Forgive—forgive!</q> The
words rang clearly in his bewildered
ears. He sank slowly to the floor, and
dropped his head to his lean knees in an
effort to remember. <q>It was my Master
who said it,</q> he muttered at last. <q>He
said <q>Forgive, that your Father may forgive.</q>
Father—my Father!</q>
</p>

<p>
The child’s face lighted with sudden
joy. <q>He said whosoever asks shall
have. I will ask, for I want to get out of
this place that I may follow my Master.</q>
Then in a loud, clear voice, after the
fashion of the Pharisees he had heard
praying in the temple and on the corners
of the streets, he cried aloud: <q>Father, I
want to get out of this place! My
Father! I want to get out—Father!
Father!</q>
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
There was a soft fumbling sound at the
door. <q>Who is calling?</q> asked a sweet,
imperious voice.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am calling,</q> answered Tor expectantly.
<q>I want to get out.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I can’t unlock the door,</q> answered
the voice, <q>but Oonah can. Be quiet till
I fetch her.</q>
</p>

<p>
A moment later the sunshine streamed
in through the open door, revealing the
figure of a very beautiful child on its
threshold. Behind the child stood a
young girl attired like a servant. She
was smiling broadly. <q>How didst thou
come in here, boy?</q> she asked, staring
curiously at the beggar’s tear-stained
face and scant rags.
</p>

<p>
<q>The fat man with the red tunic put
me here,</q> said Tor. <q>He said I broke
the vase with a stone, but I did not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It was Marcus who shut him up,</q>
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>said the maid, pursing up her lips knowingly.
<q>I must shut him in again, and
make fast the door before Marcus finds
out that I have opened it. Come, princess,
we—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Be silent, Oonah, I wish to speak to
the boy,</q> said the child with a gesture
of command. <q>Where is thy father?</q>
she continued, fixing her blue eyes on
Tor. <q>I heard thee calling him. I
thought it was Set, the slave boy; he is
always getting into trouble.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor pointed upward vaguely. <q>I
called my Father who is in heaven,</q> he
said. <q>I have not seen him, but he
causes what one asks to be done; my
Master said it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who said it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My Master. His Name is Jesus. He is
a King. He made me see. I was blind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thou wast blind?</q> cried the
serving-<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>maid, laughing incredulously. <q>Nay,
but thine eyes are bright as stars.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They were not bright,</q> said Tor
soberly. <q>They were smitten into darkness.
The Roman did it with his chariot-whip.
But the King, my Master, touched
them. So I see. I must find him. I
pray thee let me go!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let him go,</q> said the child imperiously.
<q>Dost thou hear me, Oonah?
And, stay, I will give the boy my gold
bracelet that father gave me yesterday.
Nay, I have said it!</q>
</p>

<p>
The maid clasped her hands. <q>But,
princess,</q> she entreated, <q>what would
the honorable lady, thy mother, do with
me if the bracelet be missing? And to a
beggar lad—for thou seest that he is
nothing more. The boy would be
scourged or stoned if found with such a
jewel in his hand.</q>
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
The child glanced doubtfully at Tor
from under the curling gold of her hair.
<q>What shall I give thee, boy?</q> she
asked. <q>For I will give thee something;
thou hast amused me, and Oonah here is
so stupid. I am quite weary of her.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am hungry,</q> said Tor promptly.
<q>Also, I am thirsty. Also, I want to get
out of this place.</q>
</p>

<p>
The little princess burst into a silvery
laugh. <q>Come with me,</q> she said imperiously.
And, before the maid could
stop her, she seized the beggar child by
the hand and drew him away up the steps
of a marble terrace. Oonah followed in
terrified silence.
</p>

<p>
Beneath the shadow of a silken canopy,
on a couch of ivory and silver cushioned
with rose-colored damask reclined a
lady. The most beautiful lady, thought
Tor, that the sun ever shone upon. The
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>beggar’s brilliant eyes sparkled with
amazement and pleasure; his white teeth
glimmered through his scarlet lips in an
innocent smile, which faded before the
look of haughty displeasure on the lady’s
fair face.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is this, Felicia?</q> she demanded,
raising her head from the pillow
to a white hand loaded with gems.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, my worshipful lady,</q> began
Oonah, trembling under the cold, questioning
eyes which were bent upon her.
<q>I beseech of thee to listen to me, while
I—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Be silent, Oonah,</q> said Felicia,
stamping her small foot. <q>I will explain.
I was trying to amuse myself in
the gardens, as usual, with this foolish
Oonah,</q> she went on rapidly, <q>and I
heard some one call. It was this boy.
That ugly, meddlesome Marcus had shut
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>him into the cellar without food or drink.
He has done nothing at all, and more
than that he is the servant of a King. I
wished to give him my bracelet and let
him go. But Oonah disputed the matter
with me, as I have forbidden her
to do. May I not do as I will with my
own?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Stay, my child, I will call Marcus,</q>
said the lady, smiling. <q>He will explain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, he shall not interfere,</q> cried
the spoiled child. <q>The boy hath
amused me, and Marcus shall not have
him. Heigho! this Jerusalem is so dull.
I am weary of it.</q> The child threw back
her head with an exaggerated gesture of
lassitude which brought another smile
to the lady’s lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>How hath the boy amused thee, little
one?</q> she asked languidly. <q>If there is
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>anything diverting about this place I
would fain hear of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The boy was blind, mother, and the
King, his Master, touched his eyes and
they became bright, as thou seest them.
Is not that an amusing story?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What King in Jerusalem can heal
blind eyes?</q> asked the lady, turning
with some curiosity to Tor.
</p>

<p>
<q>His name is Jesus,</q> said Tor simply.
</p>

<p>
The lady drew her delicate brows together.
<q>I have heard of the man,</q> she
said coldly. <q>He is arousing sedition
among the turbulent Jews, as hath many
a one before him. He will shortly be
dealt with after his kind, I doubt not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He will not be hurt,</q> said Tor positively.
<q>My Father will not permit anything
to befall him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thy Father?</q> repeated the lady.
<q>And who, pray, is thy Father?</q>
</p>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<p>
<q>He is in heaven,</q> explained Tor. <q>He
listens to me, and to any one who calls.
It was because I prayed to him, as my
Master said, that the door was opened.
And now, let me go. I must find my
Master.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Stay,</q> said the lady frowning, <q>I
will be further amused. Wast thou always
blind—before the King, thy Master,
touched thee?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> said Tor. <q>I had my eyes as
now. Then one day I pursued the
Roman Pilate, as he rode in his chariot,
and asked for denarii. He struck me
with his whip, and the lash blinded me.
I cursed the man many times in my blindness
with strong curses that blight like
a flame. But now I have forgiven him,
because my Master commands me to forgive
if I have aught against any one. For
this saying I have forgiven the cruel
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>Gentile, who is hated of all Jerusalem;
also, I have forgiven—</q>
</p><anchor id="image112"/>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: <q><q>TAKE HIM AWAY!</q> SHE COMMANDED.</q>]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><figure rend="w80" url="images/p112.jpg"><head><q><q>TAKE HIM AWAY!</q> SHE COMMANDED.</q></head><figDesc><q><q>TAKE HIM AWAY!</q> SHE COMMANDED.</q></figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
Tor was interrupted by a smothered
exclamation from the lady. Her blue
eyes were blazing with sudden anger.
<q>Take him away,</q> she commanded.
<q>Thrust him into the street—at once.
Dost thou hear, Oonah!</q>
</p>

<p>
The child, Felicia, stood as if rooted
to the ground in amazement, her large
eyes brimming over with tears, while
Oonah, roused to action by the wrath in
her mistress’s face, seized Tor by the
shoulder and hurried him through the
garden, pausing only to unlock a small
door in the wall. <q>Run, now, beggar,
for thy wretched life,</q> whispered the
girl, as she pushed the boy into the
street. <q>This is the house of Pilate, and
yonder was his wife and child.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VIII. Chelluh Drives a Bargain"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VIII. Chelluh Drives a Bargain"/>
<head>CHAPTER VIII<lb/>CHELLUH DRIVES A BARGAIN</head>

<p>
The dog, Baladan, led a lonely life in
these days. Confined to his own
little quarter of Jerusalem by that
unwritten yet inexorable law which prevails
to this day among the half wild
street dogs of oriental cities, he dared
not follow his adopted master beyond the
corner of the short, dark street which
was his chosen haunt. After some mysterious
fashion the dog was aware that
should he venture alone into the streets
and squares beyond he would be instantly
torn in pieces.
</p>

<p>
’Tis seldom that an animal of the
pariah breed shows the least regard or
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>affection for men. But Tor was so like
a little animal himself that the heart of
the great, gaunt beast had gone out to
him. And Tor responded in kind. The
undivided love of a beast is better than
no love at all. Perhaps it is because of
this that the heart of a dog is so loving;
more than once has it solaced pain that
would otherwise be unbearable in the
nobler heart of a child.
</p>

<p>
Baladan was licking with anxious care
a fragment of leather once worn by his
little master. This done, he laid his
ugly head upon it, and dreamed a vague
dream of delight in which one figure—the
figure of Tor—moved always before
him.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly he sprang up, his rough coat
bristling, and listened, then with a whine
of delight bounded forward and flung
himself upon the small, half-naked figure
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>that was stealing along in the shadow of
the high walls.
</p>

<p>
Tor was breathing fast and his puny
chest heaved with an occasional
strangling sob as he flung himself down
by the dog. <q>Oh, Baladan,</q> he whispered,
<q>I can’t find him; what shall I
do?</q>
</p>

<p>
Baladan covered the child’s feet with
warm, wet kisses, his great yellow-brown
eyes brimming over with tears of
anxious affection. He moaned and gurgled
and laid one hard paw on his
master’s knee in token of his utter allegiance.
Tor wound his thin arms about
the dog’s neck, and buried his face in the
scanty yellow fur. <q>Let us sleep, Baladan,</q>
he said drowsily, after a time.
And the two curled themselves in their
old haunt under the dark archway and
presently dreamed and slept.
</p>

<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>

<p>
The sound of voices lowered to a hissing
whisper suddenly aroused the child.
He touched the dog warningly, and
listened. A name had been spoken—the
name of his Master—he was sure of
it.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have a score to settle with the Galilean,
I tell thee,</q> said the whining voice
of Chelluh. <q>The other man is nothing
to me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Did he not heal thee of blindness?</q>
demanded the second voice with a touch
of impatience.
</p>

<p>
<q>He did, and that I will swear to.
Since then the matter has been noised
abroad, and no one will give me so much
as a denarius to buy my daily victual.
They tell me to work—to dig—to cut
stone—to build walls. May the Furies
reward them! I will not work, and I
will eat.</q>
</p>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
<q>Thou shalt eat thy fill if thou wilt do
my bidding. Listen. This man, Jesus,
who has so taken thy living from thee, is
either a God or a false prophet—may
Jehovah help me, but I know not what
he is! The priests and Pharisees hate
him. The people are divided. He must
declare himself either one way or the
other. I have sworn that I will force
him to it. And I have sworn further
to deliver him into the hands of the
priests without tumult. I have watched
thee and thou art a tool fitted to my
hand. Go thou among those of thine
own sort and arouse them against the
man. Thou canst do it. Thou hast a
nimble tongue, and the rabble will hear
thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What if he be a God,</q> demanded
Chelluh, with a gesture of fear. <q>Nay,
I will have none of it. He opened mine
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>eyes, and I was born blind. I am afraid
to lift my hand against such a man.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But if he be a God,</q> said the other
eagerly, <q>he will make it known rather
than die like a criminal. Hark you, they
will stone him, or crucify him, if they are
able.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am afraid of the man,</q> growled
Chelluh. <q>And who art thou to do this
thing! I am no whining Levite; but
thou—art verily a devil.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am a patriot,</q> declared the other
boldly. <q>I know the man well. He
professes to be Messiah. If he is the
true Deliverer not a hair of his head shall
be hurt; if not, let him die the death. I
have sworn it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then was a short silence broken by
the musical chink of silver. <q>There is
naught to fear from Jesus of Nazareth,</q>
said the voice of the man who had
de<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>clared himself a patriot. <q>He would
render to no man evil for evil. I have
heard him say it many times, and I
know that he is true. He loves his
enemies and forgives every one who offends—not
once only, but seventy times
seven. If he prove to be Messiah I shall
confess my plans and my thoughts to
him, and he will forgive me readily. I
shall then be a great prince and potentate
in the new kingdom. This paltry
sum shall be multiplied to thee thrice
over.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will do it,</q> said Chelluh, shaking
the silver pieces in his hard palms till
they chinked again. <q>And I also will be
forgiven, after I have worked my will
with the man and with the multitude.</q>
The beggar laughed aloud.
</p>

<p>
Tor shuddered at the evil sound as he
lay quiet in his lair. After that the
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>silence remained unbroken, and the child
at length ventured to peep out from the
archway. The two men were just emerging
into the brightly-lighted square
beyond, and the sun falling full upon the
face of Chelluh’s companion revealed it
as the face of Judas. Tor flung his arms
about the neck of the dog. <q>Oh, Baladan,</q>
he whispered, <q>I must find my
Master. If I were only a great man with
a great sword how I would fight for
him!</q>
</p>

<p>
But the boy remained where he was
for another hour till the sun had sunken
behind the mountains. Then, emerging
into the twilight of the narrow street, he
trotted noiselessly away. Baladan followed
at his heels like a shadow, and
like a shadow refused to be left behind
at the accustomed boundary. Some
vague stirring in the dog’s loving heart
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>told him that his master was going into
danger, and forthwith his own imminent
peril was forgotten.
</p>

<p>
To his unbounded joy, Tor saw not
many rods distant the figure of Peter,
the Galilean, walking swiftly along with
bent head. He ran to him and, placing
himself directly in the man’s way, bowed
himself humbly before him. <q>I beseech
thee to listen to me, honorable Galilean,</q>
he began, <q>for I have evil tidings
which concern my Master.</q>
</p>

<p>
The dog whined uneasily, and flattened
his lean body against the stones. The
man’s angry eyes cut him like a lash.
</p>

<p>
<q>Out of my way, companion of a
pariah,</q> said the Galilean, with profound
disgust. <q>What hast thou to do
with the Master?</q>
</p>

<p>
He strode forward, shaking off with a
shudder of loathing the small imploring
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>hand of the beggar child. <q>They will
kill him,</q> cried Tor. <q>The man said
so. They hate him!</q>
</p>

<p>
The dog sprang forward with a
low growl of anger and fastened his
white teeth in the garments of the
fisherman. That wail of anguish in
his master’s voice had roused him to a
frenzy.
</p>

<p>
The Galilean raised his stout oaken
staff and smote the animal twice—thrice
with all his strength. The gaunt body
quivered, dropped, rolled over once, and
was still.
</p>

<p>
The Jew hurried away, breathing deep
in his anger and disgust. <q>I am defiled,</q>
he muttered, <q>for the breath of
an unclean beast hath polluted my
garments.</q> He glanced back over his
shoulder and beheld the beggar kneeling
by the body of the dog. And his
indig<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>nation found vent in deep-mouthed, muttered
curses.
</p>

<p>
That same night the passover was
sacrificed, and all Jerusalem feasted
with solemn rites and decorous rejoicings.
But Tor crouched on the stones
outside one of the low, dark houses
within the third wall of the city. He
had followed the Galilean afar off, had
seen him at length with his Master and
the eleven enter this house. The child
drowsed between whiles as the hours
passed, and the white moon looked
down at him between the houses. He
had forgiven Peter, the Galilean, for the
death of Baladan, even as his Master had
commanded, and that singular peace
which the world neither gives nor takes
away filled his soul.
</p>

<p>
He could have told no man why he was
so strangely content, when, in the old
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>days, fury would have scorched him.
For the moment he had forgotten the
evil words of Chelluh and the disciple
called Judas; and, remembering them, he
murmured a simple prayer to the mysterious,
unseen Father, in whom he was
coming to believe with all the strength
of his childish being. <q>Our Father will
take care of my Master,</q> he said aloud,
and smiled alone in the darkness.
</p>

<p>
Within the house, in a large upper
chamber, Jesus sat at his last meal upon
earth with the few whom he had chosen,
knowing all things that should shortly
come to pass, and understanding to the
full the pitiful ignorance and darkness
in the hearts of the disciples.
</p>

<p>
Again they disputed among themselves
as to which of them should be
accounted greatest in that coming kingdom
of glory which the Master now told
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>them plainly had been appointed unto
him. To sit upon twelve thrones judging
the twelve tribes of Israel was, indeed,
a glorious future; they accepted the idea
with complaisance, but one must be
greater than his fellows in any kingdom,
and each of them coveted the supreme
crown of power.
</p>

<p>
Then Jesus, knowing that the Father
had given all things into his hands, and
that he came forth from God, and was
going to God, arose from supper, and
laying aside his garments, took a basin
and began to wash the disciples’ feet, and
to wipe them with the towel wherewith
he was girded. And so he came in turn
to Peter.
</p>

<p>
Peter said to him, <q>Lord, thou shalt
never wash my feet.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus answered, <q>If I wash thee not,
thou hast no part with me.</q>
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
<q>Lord, not my feet only,</q> said Peter,
<q>but my hands and my head.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then came that dark moment when
the man called Judas received the
morsel of bread dipped in wine. <q>What
thou doest, do quickly,</q> said the Master,
with a look of full understanding which
penetrated the dismal labyrinth of the
man’s soul like a flash of blinding light.
</p>

<p>
Judas ran violently out of the house,
and the darkness swallowed him. He
knew himself at last. He was no eager
patriot, no doubting disciple, anxious to
force a triumphant issue. He ground
his teeth in a very fury of rage and
hatred, as he sped on his terrible mission.
</p>

<p>
The beggar child, drowsing on the cold
stones without, shuddered at sound of
that ominous, hurrying footfall. <q>My
Father will take care of him,</q> he murmured,
and again slept.
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
Within that dimly-lighted upper
chamber the compassionate Master was
trying to prepare the little company of
unsuspecting disciples for the darker
hours just before them. <q>All ye shall
be offended because of me this night,</q>
he said sorrowfully. <q>For it is written,
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
But after I am raised up, I will go before
you into Galilee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Peter answered in his bold, positive
way, <q>Although all shall be offended,
yet will not I.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus said to him, <q>Verily, I say unto
thee, that this night, before the cock
crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the Galilean answered with exceeding
vehemence, <q>If I must die with
thee, I will not deny thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
And so likewise said all the others.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IX. Before the Cock Crew"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IX. Before the Cock Crew"/>
<head>CHAPTER IX<lb/>BEFORE THE COCK CREW</head>

<p>
The primal instinct which has ever
led man to the kind bosom of earth
in his darkest hour led the man
Christ Jesus to Gethsemane. And there
under the dense shadow of the ancient
olives he threw himself down upon the
ground for that last exceeding bitter
struggle with his humanity.
</p>

<p>
And Peter, the Galilean, and the
others—slept.
</p>

<p>
Tor had followed them, noiseless and
unseen as a friendly shadow. He did
not approach the King, his Master, nor
did he again venture to accost Peter.
Squatting motionless at the gate of the
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>garden, the child thought confusedly
but joyfully of his deliverance from the
house of Pilate.
</p>

<p>
<q>It was because I prayed to my
Father,</q> he told himself, and hugged
his lean little body with a low laugh of
pleasure. <q>Hereafter I need fear nothing.
I will call and he will deliver me,
and neither man nor demon can hinder.</q>
</p>

<p>
His soul went out in a flood of love
toward the Man who had opened his
eyes, and who was at that moment lying
upon his face under the olives in a wordless
agony, and the child’s pure thoughts
mingled with the cloudy forms of angels
which comforted him.
</p>

<p>
Somewhere, afar off, lights gleamed
among the dark trees; stealthy footfalls
and hushed voices beyond the garden
wall reached the boy’s keen ears. He
sprang up and listened intently.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
The glare of smoking torches and the
irregular tread of hurrying feet sent
vibrations of horror through the shuddering
night. But the Man of Nazareth
no longer lay upon his face amid the
shadows. He came forth to receive the
brimming cup of his sorrows radiant
with the power that had never failed
him. Stooping over his sleeping disciples
he called them: <q>Arise, let us be going:
behold, he that betrayeth me is at hand.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now Judas had before agreed with the
officers that he would greet his Master
with a kiss. <q>So that ye may know the
man from his disciples,—stupid dolts
every one and not worth the taking.</q>
</p>

<p>
As the motley crowd of temple police,
bearing torches, followed by a rabble of
the curious, advanced into the gloom of
the garden a superstitious awe fell upon
them. They drew back to a man and
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>hesitated, casting fearful glances at the
dark masses of trees moving gently in
the night wind. Some unseen, noiseless
terror seemed to lurk amid the shifting
shadows. <q>If the man be a prophet,</q>
whispered one, <q>there be blasting lightnings
at his call. Let us go back.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Judas turned his sneering face
upon the speaker with a low laugh of
scorn. <q>Master! Master!</q> he cried
mockingly, and running forward he
clasped and kissed the Saviour of the
world.
</p>

<p>
Jesus said to him, <q>Judas, betrayest
thou the Son of man with a kiss?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lord, shall we smite with the
sword?</q> cried one of the disciples.
</p>

<p>
Not waiting for an answer, Peter drew
his weapon and aimed a mighty blow at
the officer nearest him. The man fell
back with a bellow of rage and pain,
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>while his companions sprang forward
and seized Jesus.
</p>

<p>
The eyes of the prisoner, grave, calm,
and compassionate, were fixed upon the
wounded man, from whose severed ear
blood spurted in a torrent. <q>Permit me
thus far,</q> he said gently to the officers
who grasped him by the arms, and reaching
forth he touched the ear and healed
it.
</p>

<p>
Then that omniscient gaze turned full
upon Peter, who stood staring in a frozen
stupor at the being he had believed to
be the invincible Messiah.
</p>

<p>
<q>Put up again thy sword into its
place,</q> said the Master; <q>for all they
that take the sword shall perish with the
sword.</q> Then, answering further the
thoughts that looked out of the bewildered,
terror-stricken eyes of the
man whom he had named <q>The Rock,</q>
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>he said: <q>Thinkest thou that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve
legions of angels? But how then shall
the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it
must be?</q>
</p>

<p>
But he uttered no prayer to his Father,
and the ranks of the angelic host remained
hid from the expectant eyes that
searched the empty heavens.
</p>

<p>
In that same hour Jesus said to the
multitude which gathered about him,
threatening, yet awe-stricken by the
miracle, <q>Are ye come out, as against
a thief, with swords and staves? When
I was daily with you in the temple,
ye stretched forth no hands against me:
but this is your hour, and the power of
darkness.</q>
</p>

<p>
At that word the darkness closed in
about him—and it was night.
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
In the courtyard of the high priest’s
house Tor lurked in the shelter of a doorway
and looked on. No one had noticed
the child as he slipped in with the crowd
that held at its core the silent Man of
Nazareth. Peter had also followed.
Tor watched the Galilean seat himself
with the others at a small fire which was
kindled in the midst of the place. He
had turned his back upon the travesty of
a legal examination which was going on
at the upper end of the hall and was
warming his fingers with an air of complete
indifference.
</p>

<p>
<q>So the dangerous prophet is proven
but a man of straw, after all,</q> quoth one
of the lesser officers of the police with a
contemptuous gesture toward the meek
figure of the Nazarene. <q>Look you
upon the fellow now, he hath never a
word to say for himself, and there are
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>no lightnings—no thunders. By the
seven-branched candlestick, I declare to
you that I was in a cold sweat when
I laid hands on the man. But I felt
nothing more terrible than an arm
of flesh and blood under his rabbi’s
robe.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A rabbi’s robe, indeed,</q> chuckled
another. <q>He will wear another sort
before many days, I promise you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But what sayest thou to the healing
of Ben-Joseph’s ear?</q> demanded a
woman who had approached the fire.
<q>I have just talked with the son of
Joseph. He declares that from henceforth
he is a believer.</q>
</p>

<p>
A great shout of laughter greeted this
speech. <q>Ben-Joseph hath ever a nimble
tongue,</q> quoth a black-bearded young
fellow who carried a short sword stuck
in his belt. <q>A nimble tongue, say I,
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>and the long ears of an ass. One of the
Galileans made a lunge at him, but, being
a clumsy knave of a fisherman and knowing
naught of the uses of a sword, he
merely grazed the ear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, fellow, the ear was sliced clean
off,</q> growled Peter, stung to retort by
the sneering words of the Judean.
</p>

<p>
The woman bent forward to stare at
the speaker. <q>Art not thou also one of
the man’s disciples?</q> she asked curiously.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am not,</q> said Peter shortly. He
was listening painfully to his Master’s
voice in low-toned response to a question
of the high priest. At sound of a violent,
flat-handed blow, he twisted quite about
in his place and beheld the colorless face
of Jesus slowly reddening under the insult.
<q>If I have spoken evil,</q> he was
saying in a low, clear voice, <q>bear
wit<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>ness of the evil; but if well, why smitest
thou me?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Galilean rose from his place at
the fire, breathing deep, his strong hands
clenched at his sides in futile anger.
<q>Why doth he not blast them with the
word of his power?</q> he asked himself as
he stealthily watched the terrible mockery
of justice which was now drawing
to its close.
</p>

<p>
They were questioning the prisoner
sharply now. Peter could see the dark
looks of satisfaction on the faces of the
priests and Sanhedrists and the sneering
laughter of the rabble at their back.
Then came a show of witnesses against
the prisoner. Among the witnesses
stood Chelluh, the beggar who had once
been blind. <q>The man healed me of
blindness—yes, it is so, most worshipful
lords,</q> he whined. <q>’Twas
accom<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>plished by black magic and the power of
Beelzebub, I declare to you, for he who
would lightly destroy the temple of God
must needs be of the devil.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What sayest thou of the temple,
fellow?</q> demanded the high priest.
<q>Did the man dare to threaten the
temple?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Most holy and reverend high
priest,</q> replied Chelluh, <q>the Nazarene
said in my hearing, and in the hearing
of this friend of mine—an honest craftsman,
as thou seest—<q>I am able to destroy
the temple of God, and to build it
in three days!</q></q>
</p>

<p>
The high priest arose in his place and
fixed his eyes upon the prisoner. <q>Answerest
thou nothing?</q> he hissed between
set teeth. <q>What is the meaning
of this saying which these reputable
witnesses bring against thee?</q>
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
Jesus seemed not to have heard the
question. His inscrutable eyes were
bent upon the ground; upon his face
shone a faint, mysterious light. The
high priest bent forward and stared at
him, unrelentingly. <q><hi rend='italic'>I adjure thee by
the living God, that thou tell us whether
thou be the Christ, the Son of God!</hi></q> he
cried in a terrible voice.
</p>

<p>
The Man of Nazareth lifted his meek
head at that word. <q>I am,</q> he said
slowly—distinctly. <q>And ye shall see
the Son of man sitting at the right hand
of power, and coming with the clouds of
heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He hath spoken blasphemy!</q> exclaimed
the high priest, rending his garments
with a gesture of outraged
holiness. <q>What further need have we
of witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy:
what think ye?</q>
</p>
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<p>
<q>Death—death! He is guilty!</q> came
the deep-throated answer of the priests.
</p>

<p>
Cries of triumph, dreadful laughter,
the sound of buffeting palms burst forth
from judges and witnesses alike. Some
one was tying a handkerchief over the
face of the prisoner with the mocking
words, <q>Behold the Prophet!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Prophesy unto us, thou Christ. Who
is he that smote thee?</q> yelled the savage
voice of the beggar who had received his
sight; and he smote his blinded Saviour
with open palms twice—thrice—many
times.
</p>

<p>
A suffocating mist rolled blood-red before
the eyes of Peter. <q>If he were the
Messiah,</q> he groaned, <q>this could not
be. The man hath mocked and deceived
us from the beginning!</q>
</p>

<p>
Somewhere, not far away, sounded the
cheerful crowing of a cock. <q>I will go
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>back to Galilee,</q> he muttered. But his
leaden feet carried him no farther from
the awful scene than the porch. Here
he loitered, listening with a frightful,
strained attention to the sounds of
ribaldry and laughter that came out to
him through the half-open doors. <q>I
will go,</q> he said aloud. <q>I must go.
It is already day.</q>
</p>

<p>
The servants of the high priest’s
household were astir and cheerfully busy
with their morning tasks. One of them,
a buxom maid bearing a jar upon her
head, paused and stared attentively at
the Galilean. <q>Aha!</q> she exclaimed.
<q>This man also was with Jesus, the
Nazarene.</q>
</p>

<p>
Peter raised his heavy eyes to the
fresh-colored, inquisitive face of the
woman. <q>I know not the man,</q> he
snarled with an oath. The woman went
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>her way with a laughing gesture of unbelief.
</p>

<p>
Then others of the bystanders began
to cast curious glances at the haggard
face and wild eyes of the stranger. They
whispered among themselves for a space,
then a man wearing the livery of the
house of Annas advanced with an air of
determination. <q>Certainly, thou art
one of them,</q> he said authoritatively,
<q>for thou art a Galilean.</q>
</p>

<p>
Peter turned upon the man with a
torrent of angry oaths. <q>I tell thee, fellow,</q>
he cried loudly, <q>that I know not
this man of whom thou speakest.</q>
</p>

<p>
The cock crew for the second time.
</p>

<p>
The great doors of the judgment-hall
were flung wide, and the motley throng
of priests and underlings, glutted with
their awful triumph, pushed through,
dragging the piteous figure of their
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>prisoner. The face of the Nazarene
gleamed white and calm amid the dark
looks of his persecutors; his loving eyes
turned for the last time upon Peter and
flashed into his darkened soul the remembrance
of that sad word of
prophecy: <q>Before the cock crow twice,
thou shalt deny me thrice.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Peter went out and wept bitterly.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
<index index="toc" level1="X. In the Palace Garden"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="X. In the Palace Garden"/>
<head>CHAPTER X<lb/>IN THE PALACE GARDEN</head>

<p>
The wife of Pilate arose from her
couch with a troubled and haggard
look on her fair face. The maid who
attended the great lady’s toilet observed
this with curiosity. <q>There is tumult
about the gates of the palace this morning,</q>
she said, as she combed out the
long blonde tresses with a comb of gold
and ivory, preparatory to weaving
them into a graceful crown of braided
strands.
</p>

<p>
The princess shrugged her fair shoulders
with a slight gesture of weariness.
<q>There is always tumult,</q> she said
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>languidly. <q>Ah me, ’tis a dreary place—this
Jerusalem. I would I were once
more safely at Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If my noble lady will but glance into
the mirror, she will behold a fairer sight
than even Rome can offer,</q> said the
maid obsequiously, and skilfully fastened
a fresh-blown rose so that its
crimson petals rested on the white neck
of her mistress. <q>But the tumult of this
morning differs from that of other days,
honorable princess,</q> she went on
eagerly. <q>Diomed says that the Jews
have seized their prophet and are about
to put him to death—if, indeed, they are
allowed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What prophet, girl?</q> demanded the
lady, a faint flush stealing into her pale
cheeks. <q>Every man is a prophet—or
a priest, is it not so, in this hateful
Jerusalem? And the prophets have loud
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>voices, and they are always creating a
tumult.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I myself have seen this man,</q> said
the girl. <q>He is quite unlike the other
rabbis, as they call them—of a gentle
voice, and a stature majestic. I bethought
me of my gods in Athens. Yet
is the man a Jew.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His name?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>His name is Jesus; also they call him
the Nazarene.</q>
</p>

<p>
The princess uttered a faint exclamation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pardon me, I beseech thee, honorable
mistress, if I have fastened that last
plait too tightly,</q> hastily interposed the
maid, withdrawing a jeweled pin from
its place and readjusting it with elaborate
care.
</p>

<p>
<q>Didst thou say they were bringing
the Nazarene here—to the palace?</q>
de<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>manded the princess, turning her large
dark eyes upon her servant.
</p>

<p>
<q>Honorable lady, the man is already
here, and my lord, the governor, is attending
the case without upon the seat of
judgment. The Jews refused to await
the proper hour, and my lord Pilate, with
his wonted indulgence, came forth to
them. These barbarians have no hearts,
noble lady, they are without consideration
for the sleep of an illustrious
Roman. They should be scourged as
slaves.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What will they do with him?</q> muttered
the wife of Pilate, clenching her
white hands. <q>Nay, my lord should
have nought to do with this prophet.
He must dismiss the case.</q>
</p>

<p>
The maid stared at her mistress in
some perplexity. <q>The morning is
warm and fair,</q> she said at last. <q>Will
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>it please your highness to breakfast upon
the terrace? The lady Felicia is already
playing in the garden of the inner
court.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the secluded spot where slaves had
spread a table with the breakfast-service
of the princess, the morning sun struck
sparks of splendor from burnished plates
and crystal, gem-rimmed goblets. Flowers
of every delicate color and odor,
violets from Gethsemane, lilies from the
deep vale of Kedron, roses from the
nearer gardens of the palace, heaped a
golden bowl in the center, while around
it glowed the richer hues of fruit,
brought from distant parts of the country,
and flagons of delicate wine, cooling
in beds of snow fetched from the crown
of Lebanon for this spoiled daughter of
Rome.
</p>

<p>
The lady cast a dissatisfied glance
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>about the garden. <q>Where is Felicia?</q>
she asked sharply.
</p>

<p>
<q>She was here but a moment ago,
noble lady,</q> replied the maid, who had
followed her mistress with a fan of peacock’s
feathers and an armful of embroidered
pillows. <q>I will call Oonah.</q>
</p>

<p>
But neither Oonah nor the child were
anywhere to be found, and after a little
the princess began her repast with
frowning brows. <q>There is too much
noise about the place,</q> she observed in
a displeased tone, as she tasted a silver
fig smothered in wine and spices.
</p>

<p>
The servants glanced at one another
with lifted brows. <q>It cannot be helped,
honorable mistress,</q> ventured one of
them, a young Greek lad, beautiful as a
creation of Praxitiles in his short tunic
bordered with blue. <q>All the loud-mouthed
Jews of the city, it would seem,
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>headed by their priests, are surrounding
the judgment-seat before the palace. The
guard would not have admitted them;
but my lord, the governor, ordered it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He could not do otherwise,</q> said the
lady, with a slight curl of her haughty
lip. <q>But what is it that they are saying
over and again? ’Tis a horrid
sound, like the cry of wolves hungering
after their prey.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again the servants exchanged half-frightened
glances, and again the beautiful
young Greek answered his lady.
<q>’Tis a custom in this Jerusalem for the
governor to release a prisoner at feast
time,</q> he said in a low voice. <q>Perchance,
the people are demanding this
pledge from the illustrious Pilate.</q>
</p>

<p>
The lady’s face cleared. <q>Ah, it is
so,</q> she cried; <q>I remember how it befell
last year. My lord will release to
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>them the Nazarene, who is called Jesus.
Is it not so, Diomed?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Greek hesitated, and in the moment
of silence the child, Felicia, closely
followed by her nurse, rushed into the
garden. Her golden hair was disordered,
and her blue eyes reddened with
angry tears. <q>They shall not scourge
the boy!</q> she cried, stamping her small
foot. <q>I have said it; but that stupid,
wicked Marcus declares that he will do
it. Wilt thou not send for him, mother,
and cause him to be punished for disobeying
me?</q>
</p>

<p>
The princess turned her eyes severely
upon Oonah. <q>Where hath the child
been, and what is all this about Marcus?
What has happened?</q>
</p>

<p>
Oonah trembled under the cold looks
of her mistress. <q>’Tis the beggar boy
again,</q> she faltered. <q>He was beating
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>upon the door of the outer court like a
mad thing, and demanding speech with
your highness. But, of course, Marcus—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Marcus is a beast—an animal!</q>
again interrupted Felicia passionately.
<q>Listen to me, princess, I can explain
everything far better than this stupid
Oonah. Dost thou not remember the
beggar lad whose eyes were restored by
a King named Jesus? I brought him to
this very spot two—three days ago. The
boy amused me with his story. But
Oonah thrust him forth because—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I remember,</q> said the wife of Pilate
with a strange look. <q>What then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The mob wish to kill his Master, the
King, and the lad came hither to beg his
life. Marcus was about to scourge him
and thrust him forth, but I forbade it.
I say he shall not harm the boy. Do thou
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>command it also, my mother—and
quickly, for Marcus will not obey me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fetch the lad to me, Diomed,</q> ordered
the lady briefly.
</p>

<p>
The young Greek obeyed, and presently
returned to the presence of his
mistress followed by the irate porter,
his big hand buried in the rough curls
of the beggar’s head. Tor presented a
pitiable appearance, his pallid face
streaked with tears and dust, his great
eyes wide with fear and horror.
</p>

<p>
At sight of the princess the child fell
sobbing to his knees and lifted his lean
arms in an agony of petition. <q>My
Master—my Master!</q> he wailed. And
again, <q>My Master, oh, my Master!</q>
</p>

<p>
The wife of Pilate signed to Marcus
to release the boy, then she ordered
Diomed to give him wine.
</p>

<p>
Tor obediently swallowed from the
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>cup which was held to his lips; but not
once did he remove his beseeching eyes
from the beautiful haughty face of the
princess. <q>Thou canst save him,</q> he
whispered.
</p>

<p>
The lady shook her head. <q>I fear
that I cannot,</q> she said. Then to the
astonishment of every one present she
laid her delicate hand on the beggar’s
rough head. <q>Tell me why thou dost
love this man—this Nazarene?</q> she
asked softly. <q>Nay, do not weep and
tremble so, child. I will do all that I
can to save him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor choked back his tears and gazed
steadfastly into the exquisite troubled
face which leaned toward him. <q>I love
him—because he loves—me,</q> he faltered.
<q>He opened my eyes. He is
good. He is the King—my Master. I
love him.</q>
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
<q>Why do the Jews hate him so?</q>
murmured the lady. <q>In my dream I
saw him—as one altogether lovely, enthroned
high above all the gods of Rome
and Greece. Then I saw—</q> She broke
off with a shudder. The wild tumult of
voices in the square without had risen
into an awful, insistent iteration of one
terrible phrase.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do they say now?</q> she demanded
with slowly-whitening face,
turning to Diomed, who watched the
scene with a satirical curl of his handsome
lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>They are demanding the crucifixion
of some criminal, your noble highness,</q>
replied the Greek, smirking courtier-like.
<q>But why trouble thyself, dear princess,
over the doings of the wild rabble? The
man, Jesus, is no more than a Jewish
peasant—a carpenter, they say. What
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>can such an one be to the fairest princess
in—</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Go, see what is passing without,</q>
ordered the lady, with a look which
froze the insolent smile on the lips of the
Greek. <q>Go, and return quickly.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Greek reappeared almost immediately
with a white, scared face. <q>The
scene without beggars description, noble
lady,</q> he began hurriedly, answering
the command in the eyes of his mistress.
<q>The whole city is at the doors demanding
the crucifixion of the Nazarene. The
most noble Pilate believes him innocent
of any crime, and would save him if possible;
but—hear the mob!</q>
</p>

<p>
It was impossible to hear anything
else. Those awful beast-like cries penetrated
the ears of the very slaves so that
they cowered and trembled. <q>My tablets,
Maia,</q> whispered the wife of
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>Pilate. With shaking fingers she wrote
a few words upon the wax. <q>Take this,</q>
she said, turning to the Greek, <q>and give
it into the hand of Pilate himself—no
other. Go quickly!</q>
</p>

<p>
The Greek drew back in manifest
terror. <q>What, art thou afraid?</q>
sneered the princess. <q>Hold, I will go
myself. Perhaps I can save him so.</q>
She arose and was descending the steps
of the terrace, when the child Felicia
flung herself at her mother’s knees with
a scream of terror. <q>Do not go out into
that dreadful place, mother,</q> begged the
child. <q>They are horrible—those Jews.
Stay with me!</q>
</p>

<p>
The princess paused, hesitated, and
finally yielded the tablets into the outstretched
hand of Diomed. <q>Go—quickly!</q>
she urged.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XI. Love Triumphant"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XI. Love Triumphant"/>
<head>CHAPTER XI<lb/>LOVE TRIUMPHANT</head>

<p>
To Pilate, governor of Jerusalem,
seated upon the ivory chair of
office before the palace, came the
message of his wife. He glanced down
at it with some impatience, when Diomed
thrust the tablets into his hand with a
hurried word of explanation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have thou nothing to do with that
righteous man,</q> he read, <q>for I have
suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The message was signed and sealed
with the signet of the Roman princess.
Pilate’s pallid and heavy face whitened
to the lifeless hues of the wax upon
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>which the fateful words were written.
Before him stood the drooping but still
majestic figure of the Nazarene, robed in
the purple robe of his torture and wearing
the crown of thorns, a piteous sight,
before which angels were vailing their
shamed faces. Beyond the strong cordon
of the Roman guard surged the
wildest, cruelest mob of all the ages.
</p>

<p>
The governor rose to his feet slowly,
and, advancing to the side of the prisoner,
exclaimed in his loud, passionless
voice, <q>Behold the man!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mocking laughter, furious incoherent
shouts, coupled with the dreadful, insistent,
<q>Crucify him! Crucify him!</q>
burst out in wilder clamor.
</p>

<p>
Pilate looked forth over the sea of
terrible upturned eyes, and his huge
limbs trembled beneath him. Again he
glanced at the pale, melancholy face of
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>the prisoner. <q>The fellow is naught but
a Jewish peasant,</q> he assured himself.
<q>And after all, what use to cast Roman
justice before dogs. They will have
none of it.</q> Loudly he called for
water in a basin, and in sight of them
all washed his hands with spectacular
solemnity, saying, <q>I am innocent of
the blood of this just person: see ye
to it!</q>
</p>

<p>
Back came the mocking, inhuman cry,
<q>His blood be upon us and upon our
children!</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate ground his teeth in impotent
rage, and, seizing Jesus roughly by the
shoulder, he thrust him forward in the
face of the mob. <q>Shall I crucify your
King?</q> he shouted derisively.
</p>

<p>
<q>We have no king but Cæsar!</q> was
the blasphemous answer. And with that
word was the scroll rolled up and sealed
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>with the seven seals of wrath against the
day of wrath.
</p>

<p>
And they took Jesus and led him
away.
</p>

<p>
On that same day Tor was again a
prisoner. The wife of Pilate in real
pity had commanded that the child
should be comfortably entertained in the
servants’ quarters until all should be
over.
</p>

<p>
Diomed, to whom the carrying out of
this commission was entrusted, spoke
softly to the beggar in the presence of
his mistress, bidding him follow. Out of
sight of the lady the Greek laughed
aloud in his scorn. <q>Here is a guest
for our honorable entertainment,</q> he
said to the chief butler. <q>My lady the
princess hath commanded it. In which
of the chambers of state shall I lodge my
lord?</q>
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
The official sniffed his disdain. <q>Is it
an animal?</q> he demanded.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is an animal, most sapient
Clodius,</q> laughed Diomed. <q>A Jewish
swine—eh?—albeit a small one. Give
him food and wine, excellent Clodius,
for he is chiefly bone—this animal.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor ate, for he was starving; also he
slept fitfully, for he was exhausted with
fear and weeping. The sun shone warm
and friendly from the cloudless spring
heavens, and the child, lying upon a rug
which one of the slaves had flung down
for him, drowsily watched the ceaseless
dance of young grape leaves in the soft
warm wind.
</p>

<p>
The tumult without had suddenly
ceased, and an ominous silence lay
heavily upon the city. Tor thought
lovingly of his Master in the intervals
between dreams. <q>He has gone away
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>safely with the men,</q> he told himself.
<q>I shall again find him, and he will heal
blind folk as before.</q> So drowsing and
murmuring soft prayers to his invisible
Father, the beggar child rested in the
house of Pilate, while without the walls
of the city his Master, the King, was already
hanging upon the cross.
</p>

<p>
Within the great kitchens of the
palace cooks were busy preparing the
noonday meal; dishes and cups clattered
cheerfully, and the merry voices of
maidens burnishing the great wine-flagons
mingled with the chirp and whir
of sparrows flitting back and forth in the
blue air.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly, and without warning, the
bright light of the spring noon began to
fail. There was no fog, no storm, but a
veil of lurid darkness was drawn heavily
across the sky. Doors and windows
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>were thrown wide, and terror-stricken
faces stared up into the threatening
heavens.
</p>

<p>
Marcus, the crusty porter of the
palace, stood fast in his place, his dull
face blanched and terrified in the failing
light. <q>’Tis the vengeance of the
gods,</q> he muttered. <q>The Man of
Nazareth was innocent!</q>
</p>

<p>
Servants and underlings crowded the
passages in terrified groups. <q>Open to
us, Marcus,</q> they cried, beating upon
the doors till they trembled upon their
heavy hinges. <q>Earthquake!</q> wailed
a voice from without. <q>The gods are
shaking this evil city!</q>
</p>

<p>
The porter drew the great bolts with
tremulous haste, and with one accord all
rushed into the street.
</p>

<p>
Scarcely knowing how it had befallen,
the beggar child found himself on the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>street with the others, running—running
he knew not whither, through
empty streets which echoed his light
footfalls as in the dead of night.
</p>

<p>
Somewhere, afar off, there was the
tumult of a great multitude. Tor
stopped to listen, then ran on, thinking
of his Master, who was waiting for him
in the fast-gathering darkness.
</p>

<p>
He reached a gate—which gate he
knew not, but it yawned wide and unguarded.
Not far away Tor could hear
the frightened sobbing of women, the
strong curses of terrified men, the wailing
of little children, blending with the
hurried trampling of myriad feet. Suddenly
athwart the darkness flamed a
blood-red, silent flash illumining the
heavens from east to west. Against this
lurid background loomed three crosses,
stark and black. And now across the
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>gloomy valleys sounded the sullen crash
of rocks, the fall of giant trees, while the
sick earth groaned aloud and trembled
beneath its terrible burden.
</p>

<p>
Tor stood stock-still in the midst of the
road. In that instant of frozen horror
he comprehended what had happened.
<q>Oh, my Father,</q> he groaned, the
foundations of his childish faith reeling
with the reeling earth.
</p>

<p>
And the Omnipotent Love answered
this feeble cry of the least of his children,
even as it answered that far-reaching,
agonized appeal which was sounding
forth from Calvary. And so in a moment—or
an eternity—the heavens
cleared and the April sun shone brightly
upon the crosses with their piteous
burdens, upon the terror-stricken multitudes
returning to doomed Jerusalem,
upon riven tombs and shattered
moun<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>tains, upon a little child, comforted of
his Father, gazing with Christ-touched
eyes upon the cross of his King.
</p>

<p>
They took away the body of Jesus
before sunset, wrapping it in fine white
linen and odorous spices, and laying it
to rest in a garden hard by. Tor
watched all, understanding little of the
significance of the rock-hewn tomb, of
the great stone before its door, of the
Roman guard which was shortly stationed
before the sealed sepulchre.
</p><anchor id="image168"/>
<pgIf output='txt'><then>
  <p rend="ill">[Illustration: <q>HIS WICKED FACE DISFIGURED WITH RAGE AND PAIN.</q>]</p>
</then><else>
  <p><figure rend="w80" url="images/p168.jpg"><head><q>HIS WICKED FACE DISFIGURED WITH RAGE AND PAIN.</q></head><figDesc><q>HIS WICKED FACE DISFIGURED WITH RAGE AND PAIN.</q></figDesc></figure></p>
</else></pgIf>
<p>
When all was finished the child returned
to the city, sustained by some
strange expectation which he could have
explained to no one. As he would have
entered the gate he came upon a woeful
figure standing without and beating
upon its breast. It was Chelluh, his
wicked face disfigured with rage and
pain. <q>My eyes,</q> he groaned. <q>The
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>sight of that accursed cross burnt them
like a devouring flame.</q> And so it was.
And so will it ever be. He who can look
upon that cross of agony without tears of
love and pity, henceforth sees only the
blackness of darkness. The eyes of his
soul are withered.
</p>

<p>
Tor led the blind man to his old place
by the gate, and fetched him his cup,
his staff, and his water-gourd.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now go, little dog, buy me oil and
wine,</q> cried the beggar, with one of his
frightful maledictions, <q>and return to
me quickly, for I am devoured with this
flame.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Tor, looking upon him sorrowfully,
knew that he could no more serve
this evil master as in the old days. <q>I
have done thus far for thee,</q> he said in
his clear childish voice, <q>because of the
King, my Master, and because of my
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>Father in heaven. But I can no longer
abide in thy presence. Farewell!</q> And
with this he was gone, his naked feet
making no sound upon the stones of the
street.
</p>

<p>
Many days thereafter did Chelluh send
forth his dolorous cry for alms in the
doomed city of Jerusalem, for he lived
until the terrible days of the Roman
siege, perishing at last of hunger in his
chosen place by the Damascus gate.
</p>

<p>
In the green garden-close, hard by
Calvary, where the Roman guard paced
ceaselessly back and forth before that
silent tomb, Tor lingered, unnoticed and
unafraid as the birds that flitted among
the branches of the blossoming trees. It
comforted him to be near the resting-place
of his Master; and the lusty life of
the young summer sent vague thrills of
expectancy through his brown limbs, as
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>he lay upon the warm earth watching the
shifting leaf-shadows playing upon the
sealed door of the sepulchre, and the
slow-moving figures of the guard clad in
the scarlet and gold of imperial Rome.
</p>

<p>
Toward midnight of the second night,
when the great passover moon rode high
in the heavens and the garden slept in
its silver light like the garden of a
dream, the child slept, too, held in the
soft clasp of a vision which laid cool
fingers of delight on his drowsy lids.
When he awoke he lay for a full minute
staring into the branches of the olive-tree
above his head. The gray-green
leaves were all alive with a tremulous
motion in the fresh morning breeze; a
newly-awakened bird trilled softly somewhere
in the depths of the garden; the
aromatic breath of serried lilies swept
his cheek like a caress. It was happiness
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>to have slept—to be once more awake.
Then he remembered.
</p>

<p>
The Roman guard had disappeared;
this much Tor perceived at a single
glance. A second searching stare told
him much more: the door of the tomb
gaped wide, beside it stood a young man
clad in white garments.
</p>

<p>
Tor approached this radiant figure unafraid.
<q>Where is the man who opens
eyes?</q> he asked quite simply, for the
empty tomb appeared nothing strange
to the child newly emerged from his
healing dreams.
</p>

<p>
<q>He is not here,</q> the young man made
answer, with grave sweetness. <q>He is
risen, as he said. Behold he goeth before
you into Galilee; there shalt thou
see him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tor opened wide eyes of rapture upon
the angel. <q>My Master is alive!</q> he
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>whispered to himself. <q>I shall see
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
He turned as if in a dream, his naked
feet making no sound as he brushed,
light as the dawn, past the ranks of
lilies. There was a woman yonder. She
was weeping with a smothered sound of
long-drawn sobs. Tor laughed softly in
his joy. <q>He is alive!</q> he repeated
under his breath.
</p>

<p>
Then he saw with wonder that the
woman was no longer alone. She was
speaking to the Risen One, her voice
wrenched with sobbing: <q>Sir, if thou
hast borne him hence, tell me where thou
hast laid him, and I will take him
away.</q>
</p>

<p>
The child’s Christ-touched eyes knew
him though the woman did not. He sank
to his knees, his face shining with the
dazzling light of the new day.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XII. By Gennesaret Water"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XII. By Gennesaret Water"/>
<head>CHAPTER XII<lb/>BY GENNESARET WATER</head>

<p>
To Peter, broken in spirit, bowed
down with the shame of his thrice-repeated
denials, sleepless with
torturing memories of his dead Master,
came Mary of Magdala at dawn of the
first day of the week. <q>They have
taken away the Lord out of the tomb,</q>
she sobbed, <q>and I know not where they
have laid him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Peter arose at that word and girded
his garments about him that he might
run swiftly to the spot. He had no
thought of what he should do, but a
blind anguish of desire to serve the
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>Master he had scorned drove him forth
like a scourge.
</p>

<p>
He scarce noticed that John, the beloved
disciple, was with him, running
evenly at his side. Then some murmured
word of that other disciple
brought a faint memory of words spoken
and straightway forgotten, words of
painful prophecy, of unearthly hope,
which he himself had rejected with scorn
and impatience. The Galilean faltered,
lagged behind. And so it came to pass
that John was first to reach the open
tomb.
</p>

<p>
The rosy light of the new day shone
softly into the shadowy sepulchre, revealing
the rough-hewn walls, the shallow
niche wherein the body had lain, the
folded cere-cloths, the scattered spices.
The place was fragrant, bright, mysteriously
empty.
</p>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<p>
Peter stared in at the small, still,
empty place, those half-awakened memories
stirring strangely within him.
<q>When I have arisen from the dead,</q> he
murmured half unconsciously. Had the
Master indeed uttered those strange
words, or was his brain touched with
some sweet madness? He turned to
John. The eyes of the beloved disciple
were fastened upon the empty niche, his
lips moved as in prayer.
</p>

<p>
With sudden, hard-won resolution
Peter entered the tomb, stooping to look
more closely at the chill, empty bed with
its array of fair linen and odorous
spicery. He noticed with an awed tightening
of the throat that the fine linen
napkin which had been wound about the
dead man’s head was not lying with the
other cerements, but was folded carefully
apart, as if the wearer, sitting upon
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>the edge of his couch, had placed it there
with a tender thought of the giver.
</p>

<p>
His bewildered, grief-stricken eyes
met the look of dawning hope in the eyes
of the other. <q>He is not here,</q> murmured
John, <q>he is risen!</q> And on a
sudden his face became radiant with
angelic beauty.
</p>

<p>
Then the two went away in wondering
silence to their own house, and as they
went they met other women of their
company who told them of angels waiting
within the tomb with that question
which still sounds in ears grief-sealed
against the truth of Omnipresent Life:
<q>Why seek ye the living among the
dead? Go, tell his disciples and Peter,
He goeth before you into Galilee: there
shall ye see him, as he said unto you.</q>
</p>

<p>
To Galilee, therefore, after certain
days of growing hope and marvelous
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>vision, the disciples journeyed in great
numbers, and with them went a certain
small lad, of a joyous and shining face,
no longer a homeless beggar of Jerusalem,
but a brother beloved because he
had looked upon the King in the beauty
of his resurrection body.
</p>

<p>
It was one of the women, called
Salome, who first came upon the child
as he walked slowly toward Jerusalem
in the dawning day. The little lad was
chanting softly to himself the words he
had learned on the day of his healing:
<q>Hosanna! Hosanna in the highest!
Blessed—blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the King!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why dost thou sing, child?</q> asked
the woman querulously. She was still
bearing the burden of spicery which she
had fetched to the empty tomb, and her
eyes were red with weeping and anxiety.
</p>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<p>
<q>I sing,</q> answered Tor, <q>because my
Master, the King, is alive. He opened
my eyes, which were blind as night, and
with these eyes have I seen him—alive!
Therefore, I sing.</q>
</p>

<p>
The woman shook her head sorrowfully,
for the thing was yet too wonderful
for her understanding. <q>I have
seen the empty tomb,</q> she said. <q>Also
I beheld a young man clad in white garments,
who declared to us that he was
alive; but I know not what to think.
How can it be that he is alive when he
was dead—crucified—pierced with a
spear?</q> And again she wept bitterly.
</p>

<p>
<q>I saw him,</q> said Tor simply,—<q>the
man who opened my eyes. He is alive.
I am going to Galilee to see him.</q> And
once more the child cried, <q>Hosanna!</q>
with a clear, jubilant voice.
</p>

<p>
<q>Whose child art thou, little one?</q>
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>said the woman, marveling at the brightness
of his eyes, which, indeed, shone
like the eyes of the angel at the empty
tomb. <q>And where dost thou live?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have a Father in heaven,</q> said
Tor, <q>and once I had a master who was
blind and a beggar; but him I serve no
longer, since I serve only the King who
gave me my eyes.</q>
</p>

<p>
And when, by dint of questioning the
lad, the woman found that he was without
kindred and alone in the world, she
took him to her own house.
</p>

<p>
And so it happened that Tor traveled
with that great concourse of disciples
who went to Galilee to keep the tryst
with their risen Lord.
</p>

<p>
Again Tor met Peter, the Galilean. It
was on this wise: the child, enchanted
with the beauty of the lake, wandered
upon the shore at evening, his eyes
wist<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>fully following the fishermen as they put
out one after another upon the radiant
water. <q>I should like to sail away in a
boat,</q> murmured Tor to himself.
</p>

<p>
He looked up to find the eyes of Peter
fixed upon him. <q>How camest thou
hither, small one?</q> asked the fisherman.
</p>

<p>
<q>I came from Jerusalem with the
woman who is called Salome,</q> answered
Tor. <q>I am come to see my
Master, who was dead and is alive
again. Already I have seen him. And
I shall again see him. Perhaps,</q> he
added timidly, <q>he is there.</q> The
child’s small finger pointed to the lake,
which glowed like a sea of lambent fire
in the dying light.
</p>

<p>
<q>Once he came to us walking upon
the water,</q> said the fisherman thoughtfully.
After a little his eyes wandered
to his boats, drawn high and empty upon
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>the shore. There were others of his old
comrades near at hand, and to these
Peter presently called out with something
of his old energy: <q>I go a fishing,</q>
he said.
</p>

<p>
They answered, <q>We also go with
thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
And so the boat was made ready, with
nets and lanterns, and rough fisher’s
gear for possible wild weather in the
night watches. Tor watched the preparations
with shining eyes. When all
was at length finished he bowed himself
before Peter after his old mendicant’s
fashion. <q>I pray thee, honorable Galilean,
that I also may go fishing,</q> he said
timidly.
</p>

<p>
Peter stared down at him in some perplexity.
<q>What is it that brings thee
ever athwart my path, small one?</q> he
asked, not unkindly. <q>In Jerusalem
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>thou wast verily like my shadow—and
now, thou wilt fish.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I want to see my Master, the King,</q>
answered Tor. <q>He is there.</q> Again
the small finger pointed to the darkening
lake and the solemn blue mountains
beyond. <q>It is so beautiful he will be
there,</q> he repeated softly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, then,</q> said Peter, and, catching
up the little lad, he stowed him
snugly in the bow of the great clumsy
fishing-craft amid a pile of nets.
</p>

<p>
Through stretches of moonlit water,
where the breeze rippled keenly, in the
dark lee of swelling hills, now anchored,
now drifting slowly under the winking
stars, the fishermen bent to their work.
And through the long hours Tor lay
quite still in the place where he was bid,
speaking to no one, but wrapped in a
dream of perfect delight, which the men
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>busied with their fruitless fishing could
scarce have understood.
</p>

<p>
When, now, the darkest hour, that
comes before dawn, was already past,
and the white mist that shrouded sea and
shore and drifted light as thistle-down
upon the glassy surface of the nearer
water began to glow with rose and
amber tints of dawn, Tor wriggled his
lithe little body from its nest of coats
and stood upright in the bow. His
great bright eyes were fixed upon the
wavering curtains of the mist. <q>Listen!</q>
he cried suddenly, in his clear, shrill
voice.
</p>

<p>
A long, level ray from the rising sun
burst through the vanishing clouds and
rested full upon the land not many furlongs
distant.
</p>

<p>
<q>Look!</q> cried the child again, and
pointed with his finger.
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<p>
Some one—a man—was standing upon
the pebbly shore looking out over the
water. The fishermen rubbed their tired
eyes and stared.
</p>

<p>
<q>Children, have ye aught to eat?</q>
A clear, human voice brought the little
cheerful question across the narrowing
space.
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> shouted the fishermen, satisfied
that the friendly voice belonged to some
wayfarer, curious as ever to know the
luck of an all-night fishing expedition.
</p>

<p>
<q>Cast the net on the right side of the
boat and ye shall find,</q> came the answer.
</p>

<p>
<q>Perchance he sees the ripple of a
shoal,</q> muttered Peter, and heaved the
great net for another cast.
</p>

<p>
And now the net sank with its weight
of struggling fish. Two of the men
leaped hastily into the small boat to
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>secure the catch, but Peter and John
were gazing past the heaving net at that
solitary figure upon the shore.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is the Lord,</q> whispered John.
And Peter, with a smothered cry of love
and longing, girt his fisher’s coat about
him and flung himself into the water.
</p>

<p>
Upon the shore burned a fire of coals,
and upon it sputtered a great fish, giving
forth appetizing odors to the cool morning
air. Beside the fire were piled
loaves such as the common people were
wont to use with this broiled fish. It
was all quite homely and natural, yet the
hands that busied themselves with that
simple, satisfying meal bore the mark of
the nails.
</p>

<p>
The fishermen stood with bowed
heads, no one daring to ask the question
which trembled on every lip.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come and break your fast,</q> said
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>their mysterious host, smiling upon their
awe-stricken silence. And he took the
bread and the fish and gave them to eat.
</p>

<p>
So when they had broken their fast,
Jesus said to Simon Peter, <q>Simon,
son of John, lovest thou me more than
these?</q>
</p>

<p>
Peter answered in a half whisper,
<q>Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love
thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus said, <q>Feed my lambs.</q>
</p>

<p>
He said to him a second time, <q>Simon,
son of John, lovest thou me?</q>
</p>

<p>
Again Peter answered with an
anguished glance of entreaty, <q>Yea,
Lord; thou knowest that I love thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again came the command, <q>Feed my
sheep.</q>
</p>

<p>
He said to him the third time, <q>Simon,
son of John, lovest thou me?</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Peter burst into a great passion
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>of weeping, and wept as on the night he
had denied his Master. <q>Lord,</q> he
cried out, <q>thou knowest all things;
thou knowest that I love thee!</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus said, <q>Feed my sheep.</q> Other
words spake he also which they that
heard forgot no more either in time or in
eternity.
</p>

<p>
Thus did Peter, the Galilean, who was
also called Simon, son of John, answer
his Master three times by Gennesaret
water; and thus was the bitter memory
of his three denials purged from his
soul. Verily he loved much, and was
therefore forgiven much. And to the
end of his days he remembered right well
both to cherish the lambs committed to
his care by the Upper Shepherd, and to
tend and feed the sheep both in fold and
in pasture.
</p>

<p>
So it was that he no more spoke
care<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>lessly or slightingly to the little lad, Tor,
but, counting him as a special charge
from his risen Lord, he became to him
even as a father.
</p>

<p>
And Tor, growing into manhood,
learned many things both strange and
beautiful from the world’s page; but he
found nothing there to blot out the memory
of the Man who had opened his eyes.
To the end he followed the King, his
Master, and Jesus, long since received
into the visible heavens over Galilee, yet
remained with him, a sweet and satisfying
presence.
</p>

<p rend="center; margin-top: 3"><hi rend='smallcaps'>The End.</hi></p>

        </div></body>
        <back>
<div rend="page-break-before: right; x-class: boxed">
                <index index="pdf" level1="Transcriber's Note"/><index index="toc" level1="Transcriber’s Note"/>
                <head>Transcriber’s Note</head>

<p>The illustrations have been moved so that they do not break up paragraphs
                    and are near the text they illustrate.</p>

<p>The first page has a handwritten number and the author’s autograph.</p>
                  
                <!--<p>The following changes have been made to the text:</p>-->
<!--<list>
<item><ref target="corr017">page 17</ref>, <q>Jarius</q> changed to <q>Jairus</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr022">page 22</ref>, comma added after <q>disease</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr032">page 32</ref>, double <q>doth</q> removed</item>
<item><ref target="corr057">page 57</ref>, quote mark added before <q>Let me find Prisca</q></item>
<item><ref target="corr080">page 80</ref>, period added after <q>sneer</q></item>
</list>-->
            </div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
        <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
        </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
